<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 PUBLIC "-//TEI//DTD TEI Lite 1.0//EN">
<TEI.2 lang=en>
<teiHeader>
<fileDesc>
<titleStmt>
<title>Minor Tibetan Texts: The Song of the Eastern Snow-Mountain</title>
<author key="Manen, Johan van" ref="https://viaf.org/viaf/40522559/">Johan van Manen (1877&ndash;1943)</author>
<respStmt><resp>Transcription</resp> <name key="Hellingman, Jeroen">Jeroen Hellingman</name></respStmt>
</titleStmt>
<publicationStmt>
<publisher>Project Gutenberg</publisher>
<pubPlace>Urbana, Illinois, USA.</pubPlace>
<idno type=LCCN>#####</idno>
<idno type=OLN>#####</idno>
<idno type=OLW>#####</idno>
<idno type=OCLC>#####</idno>
<idno type=LibThing>#####</idno>
<idno type=PGclearance>20210129145541manen</idno>
<idno type=PGDPProjectId>projectID601713e57eaf9</idno>
<idno type=PGSrc>67451-Van-Manen-The-Song-of-the-Eastern-Snow-Mountain</idno>
<idno type=epub-id>urn:uuid:69bb5274-1d73-44df-bf30-003d7d1e4f16</idno>
<idno type=PGnum>67451</idno>
<date>2022-02-20</date>
<availability>
<p>&availability.en;

<p>This eBook is produced by the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at <xref url="https://www.pgdp.net/">www.pgdp.net</xref>.

<p>The scans used to prepare this book are available from The Internet Archive (copy <xref url="https://archive.org/details/minortibetantext01maneuoft/">1</xref>).

</availability>
</publicationStmt>
<notesStmt>
    <note type=Description>#####<!--A short description of this document.--></note>
</notesStmt>
<sourceDesc>
<bibl>
<author>Johan van Manen</author>
<title>Minor Tibetan Texts: The Song of the Eastern Snow-Mountain</title>
<date>1919</date>
</bibl>
</sourceDesc>
</fileDesc>
<encodingDesc>
    <p>Numerous missing periods and <hi>tshegs</hi> have been supplied. This is probably an issue with the available scan-sets from which this ebook has been prepared and not necessarily an issue in the original book.</p>

    <tagsDecl lang=xx>
        <rendition selector=":lang(bo)">
            font-family: 'Yagpo Tibetan Uni', 'Qomolangma-Sarchung', 'Babelstone Tibetan', serif;
            line-height: 180%;
        </rendition>
        <rendition selector=":lang(bo-latn)">
            font-family: serif;
        </rendition>

        <rendition selector="table.border-collapse">border-collapse: collapse;</rendition>
        <rendition selector="table.border-collapse td">padding: 1pt 3pt;</rendition>

        <rendition selector=".small">font-size: smaller;</rendition>
        <rendition selector=".large">font-size: large;</rendition>
        <rendition selector=".xlarge">font-size: x-large;</rendition>
        <rendition selector=".adCenter">text-align: center;</rendition>

        <rendition selector=".lg .lineNum">
            left: 16%;
        </rendition>

        <rendition selector=".lg .verseNum">
            color: #777;
            font-size: 100%;
            font-weight: bold;
            left: 8%;
            margin: 0;
            position: absolute;
            text-align: center;
            text-indent: 0;
            top: auto;
            width: 1.75em;
        </rendition>

    </tagsDecl>
</encodingDesc>
<profileDesc>
    <langUsage>
        <language id=en>English</language>
        <language id=de>German</language>
        <language id=nl>Dutch</language>
        <language id=fr>French</language>
        <language id=bo>Tibetan</language>
        <language id=sa>Sanskrit</language>
        <language id=la>Latin</language>
        <language id=it>Italian</language>
        <language id=ms>Malay</language>
        <language id=xx>No linguistic content</language>
    </langUsage>
    <textClass>
        <keywords>
            <list>
                <item>#####</item>
            </list>
        </keywords>
    </textClass>
    <listPrefixDef>
        <prefixDef ident="f" matchPattern="(.+)" replacementPattern="https://www.pgdp.net/c/tools/page_browser.php?project=projectID601713e57eaf9&amp;imagefile=$1.png&amp;mode=image"></prefixDef>
    </listPrefixDef>
</profileDesc>
<revisionDesc>
    <list>
        <item>2021-11-08 Started.
    </list>
</revisionDesc>
</teiHeader>
<text rend="stylesheet(style/classic.css)">
<front id=frontmatter>
<div1 id=cover type=Cover>


<p><figure id=cover-image rend="image(images/new-cover.jpg)">
<figDesc>Newly Designed Front Cover.</figDesc>
</figure>



<pb id=pb.i facs="f:001">
<div1 id=titlepage type=TitlePage>


<p><figure id=titlepage-image rend="image(images/titlepage.png)">
<figDesc>Original Title Page.</figDesc>
</figure>



<titlePage>
<docTitle>
<titlePart type=series><foreign lang=la>BIBLIOTHECA INDICA</foreign>:
<lb>A
<lb><hi rend=sc>Collection of Oriental Works</hi></titlePart>
</docTitle>

<docImprint>PUBLISHED BY THE
<lb>ASIATIC SOCIETY OF BENGAL.
<lb><hi rend=sc>New Series, No. 1426.</hi>
</docImprint>

<docTitle>
<titlePart>MINOR TIBETAN TEXTS.</titlePart>
<titlePart>I.&mdash;THE SONG OF THE EASTERN SNOW-MOUNTAIN.</titlePart>
</docTitle>

<!-- [Illustration: SIR WILLIAM JONES MDCCXLVI-MDCCXCIV] -->

<byline>BY
<lb><docAuthor>JOHAN VAN MANEN.</docAuthor>
</byline>


<docImprint>CALCUTTA:
<lb>PRINTED AT THE BAPTIST MISSION PRESS,
<lb>AND PUBLISHED BY THE
<lb>ASIATIC SOCIETY, 1, PARK STREET.
<lb><docDate>1919.</docDate>
</docImprint>
</titlePage>





<pb id=pb.ii facs="f:004">
<div1 id=frontis type=Frontispiece>


<p><figure id=frontispiece rend="image(images/frontispiece.png)">

<p><table id=tbl.frontis rend="width(100%) font-size(large)">
<column rend="width(33.3%) text-align(center)">
<column rend="width(33.3%) text-align(center)">
<column rend="width(33.3%) text-align(center)">

<row>
    <cell cols=3><BO>rje yab sras gsum </BO>
<row>
    <cell><BO>rgyal tshab rje </BO>
    <cell><BO>rje rin po che </BO>
    <cell><BO>mkhas grub rje </BO>
</table>
</figure>






<pb id=pb.iii n=iii facs="f:005">
<div1 id=preface type=Preface>
<head>PREFATORY NOTE.</head>


<p>Lewin, in his &lsquo;Manual of Tibetan,&rsquo; 1879, preface, states: &ldquo;Tibet and its language are still comparatively unknown ... the familiar tongue of the people, their folk-lore, songs and ballads are all unknown.&rdquo;

<p>Far from contradicting this saying, Jäschke, the greatest Tibetan scholar of his time, stated two years later, in 1881, in the preface to the third edition of his Tibetan Dictionary: &ldquo;(To) the student who has for immediate object to learn how to read and write the Tibetan language ... existing dictionaries (are) almost if not quite useless.&rdquo;

<p>Since Jäschke&apos;s third edition, two new Tibetan dictionaries have appeared. Walsh in an article in the <abbr>J.A.S.B.</abbr>, Vol<corr>.</corr> 72, Pt. 1, n. 2, 1903, reviewing the last one of these, the one by Sarat Chandra Das, says, p. 78: &ldquo;Although the present Dictionary has fulfilled what it purposed to be, namely, a complete Dictionary of literary Tibetan, so far as our present sources of knowledge go, it does not fulfil the requirements of a standard dictionary of the entire language, and the standard dictionary of the modern and current Tibetan language has yet to be written.&rdquo;

<p>Laufer, &lsquo;<foreign lang=de>Roman einer Tibetischen Königin</foreign>,&rsquo; 1911, p. 27 <hi>et seq.</hi>, says: &ldquo;We have here to open a road through the jungles, unaided and by ourselves; we have to work through text after text and note down expressions and idioms as we meet them,&rdquo; etc.

<p>Grünwedel in &lsquo;<foreign lang=de>Padmasambhava und Verwandtes</foreign>,&rsquo; 1912, pp. 9&ndash;10, endorses Laufer&apos;s remarks and adds about the difficulty of translating from Tibetan: &ldquo;Ignorance regarding the subject-matter, mistakes and misunderstandings in the text itself, and, finally, the insufficiently explored idiomatic element of the language, of which the history is as yet poorly known, these are the main shoals.... Of all the dictionaries only Jäschke&apos;s has really achieved something in the matter of idiom.&rdquo;

<p>As a matter of fact the printed materials available for the home student do not at present enable him, if without the help of a native teacher, to translate, accurately and without skipping the difficulties, any modern Tibetan book (not even the so-called Tibetan Primers in use in Darjeeling) if such books do not happen to belong to those excerpted in the existing dictionaries. Jäschke&apos;s, which is the best from this point of view, mentions only 25 titles of texts used as his sources. Comparing this with the more than 1000 titles quoted by Skeat as the sources for the material for his Etymological Dictionary of the <pb id=pb.iv n=iv facs="f:006">English language we at once see the inadequacy of such material in the case of Tibetan.

<p>It is true that at present more showy results can be obtained by the wholesale translation of texts (more with a view to making known their general contents, than to the furnishing of a precise philological, lexicographical and grammatical analysis), and it is certain that the results of such work of translation would be more attractive and interesting to the wider public<corr>.</corr> Yet one of the most valuable contributions towards laying a sound basis for future Tibetan scholarship is the painstaking, laborious and to a certain extent inglorious and humdrum drudging away at small texts with scrupulous attention to the smallest minutiae, for a secure fixing of illustrative examples by co-ordinating correctness of text, full discussion of meanings, sharp formulation of definitions and subtle analysis of all questions and problems involved.

<p>The following essay is a first contribution towards an attempt to serve such an ideal.





<pb id=pb.v n=v facs="f:007">
<div1 id=abbr type=Abbreviations>
<head>ABBREVIATIONS.</head>


<p><table id=tbl.abbr>
<row><cell>adj.         <cell>= <cell>Adjective.
<row><cell>A.S.B.       <cell>= <cell>Asiatic Society of Bengal.
<row><cell>Bell         <cell>= <cell>Bell&apos;s Manual.
<row><cell>Cs., Csoma   <cell>= <cell>Csoma&apos;s Dictionary; if his Grammar is referred to it is specifically stated.
<row><cell>D.           <cell>= <cell>Dutch.
<row><cell>Desg.        <cell>= <cell>Desgodins, Dictionary.
<row><cell>dict.        <cell>= <cell>Dictionary.
<row><cell>dicts.       <cell>= <cell>All existing European Tibetan Dictionaries, but especially the three current ones by Jäschke, Sarat Chandra Das and Desgodins.
<row><cell>Dzl.         <cell>= <cell>Dzanglun, ed. and trsl. by Schmidt.
<row><cell>Ed.          <cell>= <cell>Edition.
<row><cell>fig.         <cell>= <cell>figuratively.
<row><cell>G.           <cell>= <cell>German.
<row><cell>Hannah       <cell>= <cell>Hannah&apos;s Grammar.
<row><cell>Henderson    <cell>= <cell>Henderson&apos;s Manual.
<row><cell>Hon.         <cell>= <cell>Honorific.
<row><cell>J.           <cell>= <cell>Jäschke, Dictionary, 3rd ed.; also Journal.
<row><cell>L.           <cell>= <cell>Latin.
<row><cell>l.           <cell>= <cell>line.
<row><cell>M.A.S.B.     <cell>= <cell>Memoirs, Asiatic Society of Bengal.
<row><cell>pr.          <cell>= <cell>pronounce<corr>,</corr> pronunciation.
<row><cell>prob.        <cell>= <cell>probably.
<row><cell>q. v.        <cell>= <cell>see.
<row><cell>S. Ch. D.    <cell>= <cell>Sarat Chandra Das, Dictionary.
<row><cell>Schmidt      <cell>= <cell>Schmidt&apos;s Dictionary, German Edition.
<row><cell>Schroeter    <cell>= <cell>Schroeter&apos;s Dictionary.
<row><cell>Sk.          <cell>= <cell>Sanskrit.
<row><cell>subst.       <cell>= <cell>Substantive.
<row><cell>s.v.         <cell>= <cell>sub voce.
<row><cell>syn(s).      <cell>= <cell>synonym(s), synonymous.
<row><cell>voc.         <cell>= <cell>vocabulary.
</table>





<pb id=pb1 n=1 facs="f:009">
</front>
<body>
<div0 id=mtt type=Volume>
<head>MINOR TIBETAN TEXTS.</head>

<head type=sub><hi>Primarily Lexicographically Treated.</hi></head>

<byline><hi>By</hi> <hi rend=sc>Johan Van Manen</hi>.</byline>


<div1 id=ch1 n=I type=Chapter>
<head><ab type=divNum>I.</ab> THE SONG OF THE EASTERN SNOW MOUNTAIN.</head>


<div2 n=A type=Section>
<head><ab type=divNum>A.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Introduction.</hi></head>


<p>In his &lsquo;<foreign lang=de>Mythologie des Buddhismus</foreign>,&rsquo; Grünwedel gives on p. 59 the figures of a triad of famous reformers of lamaism; Rje Rin po ch&mlrcomma;e, better known as Tso&ndota; k&mlrcomma;a pa, and his two pupils, Rgyal ts&mlrcomma;ab rje and Mk&mlrcomma;as grub rje. On pp. 70&ndash;72 he gives biographical notes concerning the three, and indicates their place and historical importance in lamaism. Günther Schulemann, in &lsquo;<foreign lang=de>Die Geschichte der Dalailamas</foreign>,&rsquo; gives in chapters II and III a complete compilation of what is known about these three.

<p>In the modern Dge lugs pa sect their historical importance has never been lost sight of and their memory is kept green by a universal prayer or invocation, still in daily use, opening and closing every ceremony in a Dge lugs pa monastery. In preceding a ceremony it runs as follows:&mdash;


<lg type=Group>
    <l><BO>gangs can shing rta'i srol 'byed tsong kha pa_//</BO>
    <l><BO>dngos stobs rig pa'i dbang phyug rgyal tshab rje_//</BO>
    <l><BO>mdo sngags bstan pa'i bdag po mkhas grub rje_//</BO>
    <l><BO>rgyal ba yab sras gsum la phyag 'tshal lo_//</BO>
</lg>

<milestone unit=tb rend=space>

<lg>
    <l>To the repairer of the Tibetan vehicle, Tso&ndota; k&mlrcomma;a pa (the Onionlander),
    <l>To the true, strong, wise Lord Rgyal ts&mlrcomma;ab rje (Noble Throne-prince),
    <l>To the s&umacr;tra and mantra teaching master Mk&mlrcomma;as grub rje (Noble Cleverness-perfection)
    <l>To these three victorious (illustrious) Father and Sons (Family of three), obeisance!
</lg>


<p>In closing the ceremony the words <BO>la phyag 'tshal lo </BO> are changed into <BO>gyi bkra shis shog </BO>, &lsquo;may their blessing be on us,&rsquo; &lsquo;may they bless us.&rsquo;

<pb id=pb2 n=2 facs="f:010"><p>When the monks meet for <BO>gsol ja </BO>, collective or communal tea drinking, the last three words are changed into <BO>mchod pa 'bul </BO>, &lsquo;we give our offering,&rsquo; said before drinking the first cup and whilst sprinkling a few drops in libation with two fingers, the thumb and fourth finger of the right hand. At the termination of tea drinking nothing is said at all. Except for these changes the formula remains the same for all occasions.

<p>Another pupil of Tso&ndota; k&mlrcomma;a pa was his own nephew Dge &hdotb;dun grub, about whom further particulars are given in the same passages of the two works cited above, and who may be called the first Dalai Lama, though not known by that title but by that of Rgyal ba, or conqueror. Yet it will be seen from the above formula that the three who are together called <BO>yab sras </BO> &lsquo;father and sons,&rsquo; that is Tso&ndota; k&mlrcomma;a pa and his two spiritual sons or pupils, are all three called <BO>rgyal ba </BO>. The expression <BO>yab sras </BO> has no doubt to be understood as a collective word like &lsquo;group,&rsquo; &lsquo;family,&rsquo; just like <BO>pha ma </BO> means &lsquo;parents.&rsquo;

<p>From this <BO>dge 'dun grub </BO> a small poem in praise of his teachers, the <BO>yab sras </BO>, has come to us, which we now publish. Of <BO>mkhas grub rje </BO> it is said that he founded a formal cult of his teacher Tso&ndota; k&mlrcomma;a pa, and it may be that his devotional attitude found a reflection in this poem, showing the attitude taken by his own pupil towards him and his two other teachers in his turn.

<p>This poem occurs in a miscellaneous collection of religious matter (said to comprise about 150 leaves), in a work <BO>chos spyod </BO> (&lsquo;Religious Practice&rsquo;), leaves 59, 60. I have not been able to see a complete copy of this work. In this edition the text is fairly correct and clearly legible. A small edition, complete in itself, of which I possess two copies (not quite so legible), offers several different readings which nearly all seem quite as good, and some decidedly better, than those of the larger edition. The differences shown by the two texts are, relatively to the size of the poem, so numerous and of such a nature as to preclude the idea that mere copying can have led to them. One is led to the conclusion that one of the two texts was produced <pb id=pb3 n=3 facs="f:011">from memory and not by actual copying. We shall note the variants furnished by the larger edition, marking them B., whilst following for our own text, with one exception, duly noted, the smaller edition A. My two copies of the smaller edition would seem to be prints from the same blocks but for some difference in the last page. Whether the other pages are printed from the same blocks, whilst only this one last block has been, for one reason or another, renewed (and changed in the process) may be left undiscussed for the moment. Enough to make the general statement that great care should always be exercised before pronouncing Tibetan prints as made or not made from the same blocks, and that, indeed, interesting observations may be made on Tibetan typographical practices.

<p>The title <BO>chos spyod </BO> is a very frequent one in Tibet, and indicates, like <BO>mdo mang </BO> (as in J. Dict., p. 273<hi>b</hi>, but not as on p. XXI <hi>a</hi>), a religious miscellany. The particular <BO>chos spyod </BO> from which our poem is taken is said to be one of the text-books which the Tashilhunpo tapas are required to learn by heart. The book with the same title which Laufer (<foreign lang=de>Verzeichniss der Tib. Handschr. etc. zu Dresden, Z.D.M.G.</foreign>, 1901, p. 123, n. 135) mentions, might or might not be the same. As I have not been able to examine the title pages and final pages of the book, I cannot give any further information about it. <BO>chos spyod </BO> is the marginal short title.

<p>Another Gelukpa prayer of almost equal popularity and frequency as those of the one quoted above, is the following which may be used as an alternative to the former one. It is distinguished from it in that not the <BO>yab sras gsum </BO>, but Tso&ndota; k&mlrcomma;a pa alone is invoked in it. It runs:&mdash;


<lg>
    <l><BO>dmigs med brtse ba'i gter chen spyan ras gzigs_//</BO>
    <l><BO>dri med mkhyen pa'i dbang po 'jam pa'i dbyangs_//</BO>
    <l><BO>bdud dpung ma lus 'joms mdzad gsang ba'i bdag_/</BO>
    <l><BO>gangs can mkhas pa'i gtsug rgyan tsong kha pa_//</BO>
    <l><BO>blo bzang grags pa'i zhabs la gsol ba 'debs_//</BO>
</lg>

<milestone unit=tb rend=space>

<lg>
    <l>To the unfathomable great treasury of love, the Down-Looking-One (Chenresi, Avalokiteshvara),
    <pb id=pb4 n=4 facs="f:012"><l>To the immaculate Lord of knowledge, Sweet-voice (Jamyang, Mañjughosha),
    <l>To the subduer of the hosts of devils without exception, the Master of Mysteries (Chanadorje, Vajrap&amacr;&ndotb;i),
    <l>To that crown-jewel of Tibetan sages, Tso&ndota; k&mlrcomma;a pa,
    <l>To the feet of that (or: thee, o!) Famous Goodheart (Lozangtakpa, Sumatik&imacr;rti), we pray.
</lg>


<p>The chief difference between the use of the two prayers is that the latter is more in private use, whilst the former is more favoured in what may be called official meetings and collective acts of worship. The latter prayer is often used in a manner like the &lsquo;O&mdotb; ma&ndotb;i padme h&umacr;&mdotb;&rsquo; formula, and cases in which a devotee vowed to recite this prayer once or more times a 100,000 times are known. The practical purpose of the latter prayer was thus defined by a Tibetan: <BO>tshe 'di la gzugs po skyid po na tsha mi yong ba tshe ring po yong ba dang _/_shi ba'i dus la yid dga' chos 'dzin la 'khrid rogs gnang</BO><corr><BO>*</BO></corr><BO>_//</BO> To ensure (bring, ask for) in (this present, earthly) life: health, happiness, absence of sickness, and longevity&mdash;and at the time of death a happy mind and a firm hold on (grasp of) religion.

<p>The above form of the prayer is the printed one which is used by the monks to read aloud, mechanically and repeatedly, as a sort of prayer-litany, together with other similar matter, for the benefit of their clients, or also to ensure their own salvation. It is said to occur in a prayer-book called <BO>dga' ldan lha brgya ma </BO>, which I have not seen myself and about which I have no further details.

<p>This prayer has also some variations in its final line (after the words <BO>grags pa'i </BO>) according to circumstances. This line ends, when:


<table id=tbl.4>
<row><cell>Opening <seg id=ac>a ceremony</seg>          <cell>: <cell><BO>zhabs la phyag 'tshal lo_/</BO>
<row><cell>Closing&nbsp; <seg copyOf=ac> ,, ,, </seg>   <cell>: <cell><BO>zhabs kyi bkra shis shog_/</BO>
<row><cell>Before <seg id=tea>tea</seg>                 <cell>: <cell><BO>zhal la </BO> (or <BO>du </BO>) <BO>mchod pa 'bul_/</BO>
<row><cell>After&nbsp;&nbsp; <seg copyOf=tea>,,</seg>   <cell>: <cell>nothing at all is said.
</table>


<p>It is interesting to note that one of my informants interprets the above formula as indicating that Tso&ndota; k&mlrcomma;a pa is the <pb id=pb5 n=5 facs="f:013">simultaneous incarnation of Avalokiteshvara, Mañjughosha and Vajrap&amacr;&ndotb;i, and that these persons invoked in the prayer are not referred to as a consecutive series of separate entities, but as all embodied in the one Tso&ndota; k&mlrcomma;a pa. My informant was very insistent about it that this is the general and orthodox interpretation of this prayer. The other two names of Tso&ndota; k&mlrcomma;a pa are <BO>'jam mgon bla ma </BO> and <BO>blo bzang grags pa </BO>.

<p>The closing verse of our poem is also a prayer to Tso&ndota; k&mlrcomma;a pa. It is also in use elsewhere than in connection with the present booklet and occurs elsewhere in print as well. My informant ascribes it to Gendundub himself and thinks that its wider use has spread from this booklet, though he cannot definitely assure that Gendundub himself did not appropriate it for the closing lines of his poem, taking an already current prayer to Tso&ndota; k&mlrcomma;a pa. The latter theory is plausible inasmuch as the last verse is seven-footed as against the eight-footed lines of the rest of the poem. Anyhow, the statement that this prayer also refers to Tso&ndota; k&mlrcomma;a pa alone, and is as such used and understood by all Gelukpa monks, settles a doubt we might otherwise entertain as to whether it is not addressed to the <BO>yab sras gsum </BO>, in which case its final line would have to be translated in the plural.

<p>As to the edition, in the original the verses are not marked; they are evidently four-lined. The small edition has no divisions at all, except marking the lines, but the larger edition has in addition a <BO>!</BO> (<BO>sbrul mgo </BO> = snake head) after lines 16 and 48. In my own text and translation I have by typographical disposition and by the introduction of title headings indicated my conception of the clever and very logical inner structure of the poem.

<p>The text is followed by a short discussion of the variants in it, next by a translation, and then, my main business, by a full lexicographical discussion, in alphabetical order. This embodies in the first place all the new material, supplementing, amplifying, modifying, or even only questioning, the data in Jäschke&apos;s Dictionary, 3rd edition. For this Dictionary is, as far as lexicographical method is concerned, still superior to all other, even subsequent, Tibetan dictionaries, however much valuable and additional matter may be contained in the two latter. Jäschke&apos;s dictionary is as yet the proper starting point for all future lexicographical research. In this glossary I have also drawn special attention to contradictions in these three current dictionaries, those of Jäschke, Desgodins and Sarat Chandra Das, even to such points for which I myself have not been able to suggest a solution or about which I could not bring <pb id=pb6 n=6 facs="f:014">new material. For the good of future lexicographical work in the Tibetan field, it is very necessary to point out as many as possible of the numerous existing discrepancies and uncertainties (especially relating to finer shades of discrimination and precision) so as to focus the attention of investigators on them. It is unavoidable that most of this work can only be suitably undertaken on the spot in consultation with educated, intelligent Tibetans, and not in European closets. The number of those in a position to undertake such research will, for a long time to come, remain limited enough. As indicated in the sub-title of this essay my own main object in writing it is primarily a lexicographical one. For this reason I have also incorporated in my glossary notes on side-issues and all sorts of incidental idiomatic &lsquo;catches&rsquo; which cropped up in the discussion of our text, though not immediately connected with the poem itself.

<p>As it seemed the handiest way to present all the results of my investigation I have also embodied all commentatorial matter, the philological notes as distinct from the lexicographical ones, under the same alphabet. The few syntactical remarks have also been wedged in in this list, though in their case the &lsquo;<foreign lang=de>Stichwort</foreign>&rsquo; had to be chosen more or less at haphazard.

<p>In the matter of oral information and illustrative examples embodied in this paper, my authorities are nearly exclusively my two Tibetan teachers Skarma Bsam Gtan Paul and P&mlrcomma;un Ts&mlrcomma;ogs Lung Rtogs. The first is a native of Ghoom, though of pure Tibetan extraction (K&mlrcomma;ams). He has resided for nearly a year in Lhasa, for another 3 months in Tashilhunpo (where he was Tibetan interpreter between the Tashi Lama and Capt. R. Steen, I.M.S.), and for 4 years in Gyangtse. The second is a native of Lhasa, where he resided till his 18th year, after which he spent 3 years in Tashilhunpo as a tapa. Then he wandered for 12 years through Tibet, Sikkhim and Nepal, after which he settled in Ghoom since about 1914. Until recently he was there schoolmaster (dge rgan) in the local Tibetan monastery.

<p>Both these intelligent men have given me the greatest help in long, patient and painstaking discussions concerning the lexicographical and other problems presented by this present text, as well as by several others, which I hope I will be able to publish and discuss from time to time in the future.





<pb id=pb7 n=7 facs="f:015">
<div2 n=B>
<head><ab type=divNum>B.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Text.</hi></head>


<p rend="font-size(xx-large) align(center)"><BO>@#_/_/_gsud mgur shar gdas ri ma </BO>
<lb><BO>bzhugs so_//</BO>

<p rend="font-size(large) align(center)"><BO>na mo gu ru_/</BO>


<lg>
<head>I</head>

<lg>
<l id=ln01><ab type=verseNum>I</ab> <ab type=lineNum>1</ab> <BO>shar gangs ri dkar po'i rtse mo na_//</BO>
<l id=ln02><ab type=lineNum>2</ab> <BO>sprin dkar po gnam la bsnyeg </BO><note place=apparatus>l. 2 B <choice><sic><BO>snya_ga </BO></sic><corr resp=errata><BO>snyeg </BO></corr></choice></note><BO>'dra ba_//</BO>
<l id=ln03><ab type=lineNum>3</ab> <BO>de mthong ba'i mod la bla ma dran_//</BO>
<l id=ln04><ab type=lineNum>4</ab> <BO>drin bsams shing bsams shing dad pa skyes_//</BO>
</lg>

<lg>
<l id=ln05><ab type=verseNum>II</ab> <ab type=lineNum>5</ab> <BO>sprin dkar po lding ba'i </BO><note place=apparatus>l. 5 B <BO>pa'i </BO></note><BO>shar phyogs na_/</BO>
<l id=ln06><ab type=lineNum>6</ab> <BO>'brog dge ldan rnam par rgyal ba der_//</BO>
<l id=ln07><ab type=lineNum>7</ab> <BO>mtshan brjod par </BO><note place=apparatus>l. 7 A 1 and 2 <BO>bar </BO></note><BO>dka' ba'i rin</BO><note place=apparatus rend="note-marker(**)">l. 7 B <choice><sic><BO>dri_na </BO></sic><corr><BO>drin </BO></corr></choice></note><BO>po che_//</BO>
<l id=ln08><ab type=lineNum>8</ab> <BO>pha blo bzang grags pa yab sras bzhugs_//</BO>
</lg>

<lg>
<l id=ln09><ab type=verseNum>III</ab> <ab type=lineNum>9</ab> <BO>lam rim pa gnyis kyi rnal 'byor sogs_//</BO>
<l id=ln10><ab type=lineNum>10</ab> <BO>chos zab la shin tu rgyas par </BO><note place=apparatus>l. 10 B <BO>pa </BO></note><BO>gsungs_//</BO>
<l id=ln11><ab type=lineNum>11</ab> <BO>bod kha ba can gyi skal ldan la_//</BO>
<l id=ln12><ab type=lineNum>12</ab> <BO>mgon khyod kyi bka' drin bsam mi khyab_//</BO>
</lg></lg>

<lg>
<head>II</head>

<lg>
<l id=ln13><ab type=verseNum>IV</ab> <ab type=lineNum>13</ab> <BO>sgos snyoms las 'dzin pa'i dge 'dun grub_/</BO>
<l id=ln14><ab type=lineNum>14</ab> <BO>blo cung zad chos la phyogs pa 'di_//</BO>
<pb id=pb8 n=8 facs="f:016"><l id=ln15><ab type=lineNum>15</ab> <BO>rje yab sras rnams kyi bka' drin yin_//</BO>
<l id=ln16><ab type=lineNum>16</ab> <BO>drin che bar nges </BO><note place=apparatus>l. 16 A 1 and 2 both <BO>ngas </BO>. Text from B</note><BO>so yab sras rnams</BO><note place=apparatus rend="note-marker(**)">l. 16 B closes the line with a <BO>!</BO> instead of <BO>//</BO></note><BO>_//</BO>
</lg>

<lg>
<l id=ln17><ab type=verseNum>V</ab> <ab type=lineNum>17</ab> <BO>dus 'di </BO><note place=apparatus>l. 17 B <BO>deng </BO></note><BO>nas byang chub snying po'i bar_//</BO>
<l id=ln18><ab type=lineNum>18</ab> <BO>rje yab sras khyed rnams ma gtogs par</BO><note place=apparatus>l. 18 B <BO>pa </BO></note><BO>_//</BO>
<l id=ln19><ab type=lineNum>19</ab> <BO>skyabs re sa gzhan du </BO><note place=apparatus>l. 19 B <BO>nas </BO></note><BO>mi 'tshol bas_//</BO>
<l id=ln20><ab type=lineNum>20</ab> <BO>thugs brtse </BO><note place=apparatus>l. 20 A 2 <BO>brtsa </BO></note><BO>ba'i lcags kyus drang du gsol_//</BO>
</lg>

<lg>
<l id=ln21><ab type=verseNum>VI</ab> <ab type=lineNum>21</ab> <BO>drin ji bzhin 'khur bar ma nus kyang _//</BO>
<l id=ln22><ab type=lineNum>22</ab> <BO>sems chags sdang dbang du ma song bar</BO><note place=apparatus>l. 22 B <BO>bas </BO></note><BO>_//</BO>
<l id=ln23><ab type=lineNum>23</ab> <BO>mgon khyod kyi bstan pa 'dzin pa la_//</BO>
<l id=ln24><ab type=lineNum>24</ab> <BO>dus nam yang brtson </BO><note place=apparatus>l. 24 A 1 and 2 <BO>btson </BO></note><BO>par </BO><note place=apparatus rend="note-marker(**)">l. 24 B <BO>pa </BO></note><BO>bgyid par smon_//</BO>
</lg></lg>

<lg>
<head>III</head>

<lg>
<l id=ln25><ab type=verseNum>VII</ab> <ab type=lineNum>25</ab> <BO>lar da lta gangs ri'i khrod 'di na_//</BO>
<l id=ln26><ab type=lineNum>26</ab> <BO>rang bstan pa 'dzin par khas len zhing </BO><note place=apparatus>l. 26 B <BO>cing </BO></note><BO>_//</BO>
<l id=ln27><ab type=lineNum>27</ab> <BO>gzhan bstan 'dzin dgra bo'i dwangs mar 'dzin_//</BO>
<l id=ln28><ab type=lineNum>28</ab> <BO>tshul 'di la skyo ba gting nas skyes_//</BO>
</lg>

<lg>
<l id=ln29><ab type=verseNum>VIII</ab> <ab type=lineNum>29</ab> <BO>gzhan 'phung </BO><note place=apparatus>l. 29 B <BO>phung </BO></note><BO>bar 'dod pa'i kun slong </BO><note place=apparatus rend="note-marker(**)">l. 29 A 2 <BO>slang </BO></note><BO>dang _//</BO>
<l id=ln30><ab type=lineNum>30</ab> <BO>rgyud mtshan 'dzin dam pos bcings lags kyang _//</BO>
<pb id=pb9 n=9 facs="f:017"><l id=ln31><ab type=lineNum>31</ab> <BO>lam mthon por gnas pa'i khas len byed_//</BO>
<l id=ln32><ab type=lineNum>32</ab> <BO>'di brtags na kun gyis </BO><note place=apparatus>l. 32 B <BO>kyang </BO></note><BO>khrel </BO><note place=apparatus rend="note-marker(**)">l. 32 B <choice><sic><BO>'khral</BO></sic><corr resp=errata><BO>'khrel </BO></corr></choice></note><BO>ba'i rgyu_//</BO>
</lg>

<lg>
<l id=ln33><ab type=verseNum>IX</ab> <ab type=lineNum>33</ab> <BO>lam gol sar rgas pa'i sdug yus kyis_//</BO>
<l id=ln34><ab type=lineNum>34</ab> <BO>chos tshul bzhin byed </BO><note place=apparatus>l. 34 B <BO>bsgrub </BO></note><BO>pa'i gang zag la_//</BO>
<l id=ln35><ab type=lineNum>35</ab> <BO>rgyud khong nas 'khrugs </BO><note place=apparatus>l. 35 B <BO>khrug </BO></note><BO>pa'i gdug sems can_//</BO>
<l id=ln36><ab type=lineNum>36</ab> <BO>gdon thugs la zhugs pa ma lags sam_//</BO>
</lg></lg>

<lg>
<head>IV</head>

<lg>
<l id=ln37><ab type=verseNum>X</ab> <ab type=lineNum>37</ab> <BO>dgra nyon mongs 'dul thabs </BO><note place=apparatus>l. 37 A 1 and 2 <BO>thapas </BO></note><BO>mi byed par_//</BO>
<l id=ln38><ab type=lineNum>38</ab> <BO>gshags 'gyed pa tsam gyi bshad </BO><note place=apparatus>l. 38 B <BO>'chad </BO></note><BO>nyan yang _//</BO>
<l id=ln39><ab type=lineNum>39</ab> <BO>'dre shar sgo'i phyogs su gnas pa la_//</BO>
<l id=ln40><ab type=lineNum>40</ab> <BO>glud nub sgor gtong </BO><note place=apparatus id=ln40n1>l. 40 B <BO>skyel bzhin </BO> instead of <BO>gtong ba </BO></note><BO>ba </BO><note place=apparatus sameAs=ln40n1></note><BO>don re chung _//</BO>
</lg>

<lg>
<l id=ln41><ab type=verseNum>XI</ab> <ab type=lineNum>41</ab> <BO>don de ltar go ba'i bshes gnyen pa</BO><note place=apparatus>l. 41 B <BO>rnams </BO></note><BO>_//</BO>
<l id=ln42><ab type=lineNum>42</ab> <BO>spyir lus can kun la bka' drin bsam</BO><note place=apparatus>l. 42 B <BO>soms </BO></note><BO>_//</BO>
<l id=ln43><ab type=lineNum>43</ab> <BO>sgos chos mdzad yongs la dag snang sbyong </BO><note place=apparatus>l. 43 B <BO>sbyongs </BO></note><BO>_//</BO>
<l id=ln44><ab type=lineNum>44</ab> <BO>dgra nang na 'dug pa'i nyon </BO><note place=apparatus id=ln44n1>l. 44 B last three words in B <BO>bdag 'dzin thul </BO></note><BO>mongs </BO><note place=apparatus sameAs=ln44n1></note><BO>'dul</BO><note place=apparatus rend="note-marker(**)" sameAs=ln44n1></note><BO>_//</BO>
</lg>

<lg>
<l id=ln45><ab type=verseNum>XII</ab> <ab type=lineNum>45</ab> <BO>mi kho bo'i rjes mjug grogs po </BO><note place=apparatus>l. 45 A 1 and B <BO>bo </BO></note><BO>rnams</BO><note place=apparatus>l. 45 B <BO>kun </BO></note><BO>_//</BO>
<l id=ln46><ab type=lineNum>46</ab> <BO>yid phyogs su lhung bas </BO><note place=apparatus id=ln46n1>l. 46 last four words in B <BO>bar mi byed par </BO></note><BO>ma </BO><note place=apparatus sameAs=ln46n1></note><BO>'chang </BO><note place=apparatus sameAs=ln46n1></note><BO>bar</BO><note place=apparatus sameAs=ln46n1></note><BO>_//</BO>
<pb id=pb10 n=10 facs="f:018"><l id=ln47><ab type=lineNum>47</ab> <BO>blo </BO><note place=apparatus>l. 47 A 2 <BO>bla </BO></note><BO>gzu bor gnas pa'i rtog dpyod kyis_/</BO>
<l id=ln48><ab type=lineNum>48</ab> <BO>lam drang por </BO><note place=apparatus>l. 48 4 2 <BO>bor </BO></note><BO>zhugs pa cis kyang legs_//</BO><note place=apparatus>l. 48 B has <BO>!</BO> at the end of the line instead of <BO>//</BO></note>
</lg></lg>

<lg>
<head>V</head>

<lg>
<l id=ln49><ab type=verseNum>XIII</ab> <ab type=lineNum>49</ab> <BO>gtam 'di la brten nas 'gro ba rnams</BO><note place=apparatus>l. 49 B <BO>kun </BO></note><BO>_//</BO>
<l id=ln50><ab type=lineNum>50</ab> <BO>byams snying rjes drangs pa'i sems bskyed dang _//</BO>
<l id=ln51><ab type=lineNum>51</ab> <BO>dbyings spros bral rtogs pa'i lta ba yis_//</BO>
<l id=ln52><ab type=lineNum>52</ab> <BO>dpal bla med byang chub myur thob shog_//</BO>
</lg>

<lg>
<head>VI</head>

<lg>
<l id=ln53><ab type=verseNum>XIV</ab> <ab type=lineNum>53</ab> <BO>sku la mtshan dpe'i dpal 'bar zhing _//</BO>
<l id=ln54><ab type=lineNum>54</ab> <BO>gsung dbyangs yan lag drug cus brgyan_//</BO>
<l id=ln55><ab type=lineNum>55</ab> <BO>thugs ni zab yangs mkhyen brtse'i gter_//</BO>
<l id=ln56><ab type=lineNum>56</ab> <BO>dpal ldan bla ma'i bkra shis shog_/</BO>
</lg></lg></lg>


<p rend="align(center) font-size(smaller)"><BO>ces pa 'di ni thams cad </BO><note place=apparatus id=col.n1>Colophon, A 2 has no <BO>cad </BO> after <BO>thams </BO>, and has a final <BO>sa </BO> to <BO>gdungs </BO>. B has a different colophon <BO>'di b+Na chen dge 'dun grub kyis mdzad pa'o_//</BO></note><BO>mkhyen pa chen po dge 'dun grub pa dpal bzang </BO>
<lb><BO>pos gdung </BO><note place=apparatus sameAs=col.n1></note><BO>dbyangs su mdzad pa'o_//</BO>
<lb><BO>bkra shis_//</BO>



<divGen type=apparatus>



<div2 n=C>
<head><ab type=divNum>C.</ab> <hi rend=sc>The Variants.</hi>


<p>The texts used were two small blockprints, nearly identical A 1 and A 2, and a large blockprint B.

<p>On the whole A furnishes a good text and it may be used as the basis for the edition. Two curious cases of the use of <BO>ba </BO> for <BO>pa </BO> (7. 45) seem more than mere negligence of the wood-cutter <pb id=pb11 n=11 facs="f:019">in connection with the badly printed <BO>pa'i </BO> in l. 13 (which looks also like <choice><sic><BO>ba'i</BO></sic><corr><BO>ba'i </BO></corr></choice>) and also a <BO>pa </BO> like <BO>ba </BO> in l. 23. Inversely there is a clear <BO>pa </BO>&mdash;<BO>thapas</BO>&mdash;in l. 37 and a <BO>bor </BO> for <BO>por </BO> in l. 48. A 2 twice lacks the hook in <BO>rtsa</BO> (20<corr sic=.>,</corr> 24) and the naro <foreign lang=bo>&nbsp;&nbsp;&#x0F7C;&nbsp;</foreign> in lines 29, 47. These two latter variants may be due to deterioration in the blocks or the roughness of the paper, or defective inking. Otherwise A 1 and A 2 are practically identical, and except for the last pages (the last two of A 1 are condensed into a single one in A 2) the two copies may have been printed from the same blocks.

<p>In 5 B writes <BO>lding pa'i </BO> for <BO>ba'i </BO> as <corr sic=authorised>authorized</corr> by the Dicts. But the question of final particles is still far from being satisfactorily settled. The Dicts. are on the whole much at variance on this point. Desg. gives as a rule a greater variety of them than J.

<p>Some differences in the tenses of the verb are presented by the two copies of A on one side and B on the other. In l. 2 <BO>snyeg </BO> is the present tense as against the past form <choice><sic><BO>bsnyeg</BO></sic><corr><BO>bsnyeg </BO></corr></choice> in A. As to the sense both would do, and though the past form in Tibetan is better rendered in English by the present we may understand the past form as &lsquo;has begun to rise.&rsquo; In verse XI B gives imp. forms, making the sense one of command whereas A has present forms giving a mere statement. The final <BO>sa </BO> in <BO>soms </BO>, however, is not recorded in the Dicts., nor the form <BO>sbyongs </BO>; <BO>thul </BO>, however, is a regularly recognised imp. form.

<p><BO>'khrugs </BO> in l. 35 is a correct past tense. The form <BO>khrug </BO> (without an initial <BO>'a </BO>) as in B is not recorded, though <BO>'khrug </BO>, present, might do equally well. <BO>'khrel </BO>, l. 32, is not authorized by the Dicts. which all omit the initial <BO>'a </BO>. The substitution of <BO>'chad </BO> for <BO>bshad </BO> (38) seems to lack sufficient urgency, <pb id=pb12 n=12 facs="f:020">though J. records a <BO>'chad nyan pa </BO> &lsquo;to listen to an explanation&rsquo; from Sch. A <BO>'phung </BO>, l. 29, is correct according to the Dicts., not <BO>phung </BO> of B, though J. and S. Ch. D. give the alternative spelling.

<p>In the treatment of grammatical particles A is superior to B. <BO>par </BO> (10) is correct, not <BO>pa </BO> B. It is an adverbial construction. In 18, <BO>par </BO>, and 22, <BO>bar </BO>, equally so. In 24 <BO>par </BO> is a terminative dependent on <BO>bgyid pa </BO>.

<p>The remaining variants are all in the nature of equivalents for or against which nothing (or the same!) can be said, and which would do as well as the readings we have adopted. Many of them are, however, curious for this reason, that they are not homonymous variants at all and consequently substitutions for, not corruptions of, the text. We have to leave the question alone whether those in A or in B are likely to be the original ones.

<p>In 7, <BO>drin po che </BO>, very kind, is as good as <BO>rin po che </BO>, very precious; in 17 <BO>dus 'di nas </BO> means practically the same as <BO>dus deng nas </BO>, &lsquo;from this moment&rsquo;, and &lsquo;from this very day.&rsquo; In 19 <BO>gzhan du </BO> &lsquo;in another&rsquo; seems even a trifle better than <BO>gzhan nas </BO> &lsquo;from another.&rsquo; <BO>gyis </BO> seems better in 32 than <BO>kyang </BO> in B, &lsquo;even, indeed!&rsquo;<corr sic=.></corr> <BO>byed pa </BO> &lsquo;to perform,&rsquo; in l. 34, is as good as <BO>bsgrub pa </BO>, also &lsquo;to perform, accomplish,&rsquo; and the future form of the latter would be better if changed into a pf. form <BO>bsgrubs </BO> or pr. <BO>sgrub </BO><corr>.</corr> In l. 40 <BO>gtong ba </BO>, &lsquo;the sending, throwing,&rsquo; seems as good as <BO>skyel bzhin </BO>, &lsquo;(as silly) as the conveying.&rsquo; In 41 the article <BO>pa </BO> means the same as plural <BO>rnams </BO> B. In 44, <BO>bdag 'dzin </BO>, &lsquo;egotism, selfishness,&rsquo; is substituted for <BO>nyon mongs </BO>, <pb id=pb13 n=13 facs="f:021">&lsquo;sin&rsquo;; similarly in 45 and 49 <BO>kun </BO> &lsquo;all,&rsquo; for <BO>rnams </BO> &lsquo;many.&rsquo; Lastly, the difficult construction <BO>lhung bas ma 'chang bar </BO>, in 46, is replaced in B by the easier <BO>lhung bar mi byed par </BO>, &lsquo;not allowing (letting, making) it [the soul] (to) fall&rsquo; instead of &lsquo;letting it remain fallen when once it has done so.&rsquo;

<p>All these examples seem to point out that one of the blockprints (probably the larger one) was derived from a version which was not actually copied from the original but rather written down from memory. The variants are no cutting or copying mistakes except <BO>nges so </BO> and <BO>ngas so </BO> l. 16, and <BO>drin po che </BO> and <BO>rin po che </BO> in l. 7.

<p>In l. 26 we find an erroneous <BO>cing </BO> for <BO>zhing </BO>.

<p>The two <BO>!</BO> at the end of lines 16 and 48 in B (or rather at the beginning of the following lines, for that is where they must be put if the Tibetan text is printed line for line like English verse) do not agree with my conception of the structure of the poem as indicated by my typographical arrangement of it. I would not have expected a <BO>!</BO> after line 16 but after lines 12, 24, 36 and 48. The occurrence of the sign after line 48 may, however, be taken to indicate that the next two verses have to be regarded as appendices to the body of the poem proper.

<p>It must be mentioned that in the title, in both copies of A., the final word is <BO>bzhugs </BO>. In B., as the poem occurs in the body of the volume, there is no equivalent title. I have written <BO>bzhugs soX </BO> without prejudice to the question whether the form <BO>bzhugs </BO> is legitimate or not. My teachers say that before a <BO>//</BO> the <BO>so </BO> is required.

<p>The only reading taken from B is <BO>nges </BO> for the incomprehensible <BO>ngas </BO> of A 1 and 2, in line 16.

<p>It may be, finally, remarked that the three copies from which this edition was prepared, show once more that textual <pb id=pb14 n=14 facs="f:022">correctness and perfection of typographical execution are not necessarily related in Tibet. The two small prints which are, but for the single omission of a dengbu in line 16, quite correct, are small, badly printed on bad paper, and not carefully or neatly cut. The larger copy is neat, well printed on good paper, very legible, but not nearly so satisfactory as a text.




<div2 n=D>
<head><ab type=divNum>D.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Translation.</hi></head>

<head type=sub><hi>The Song of the Eastern Snow Mountain.</hi></head>


<lg>
<head>OBEISANCE TO THE TEACHER.</head>

<lg>
<head><ab type=divNum>I.</ab> (<hi rend=sc>His Teachers</hi>).</head>

<lg>
<l><ab type=verseNum>1.</ab> On the peak of the white snow mountain in the East
<l>A white cloud seems to be rising towards the sky.
<l>At the instant of beholding it I remember my teacher<corr resp=errata> (or: teachers).</corr>
<l>And, pondering over his<corr resp=errata> (or: their)</corr> kindness, faith stirs in me.
</lg>

<lg>
<l><ab type=verseNum>2.</ab> To the East of where that cloud is floating,
<l>In that entirely victorious Virtue Solitude,
<l>There resided the precious ones, difficult to be invoked,
<l>Father Famous Goodheart, the Sire with (his two spiritual) sons.
</lg>

<lg>
<l><ab type=verseNum>3.</ab> The yoga and other (teachings) of the two stages of the road
<l>Relating to the profound Doctrine, they preached most fully.
<l>To the pious of snowy Tibet
<l>Your grace, O protectors, was ineffable.
</lg></lg>


<lg>
<head><ab type=divNum>II.</ab> (<hi rend=sc>Himself</hi>).</head>

<lg>
<l><ab type=verseNum>4.</ab> Especially that this ease-loving Clergy-Perfection
<l>Has turned his mind a little towards the Doctrine
<l>Is (thanks to) the kindness of these noble father and sons.
<l>Truly your kindness is great, O father and sons.
</lg>

<lg>
<l><ab type=verseNum>5.</ab> From now onward till (I reach) the heart of saintship,
<l>Whilst, except in you, noble father and sons,
<l>I will not place my hope for protection in anyone else,
<l>I pray you to drag me along with your mercy-hook.
</lg>

<lg>
<l><ab type=verseNum>6.</ab> Though I cannot repay you in proportion to whatever your favours have been,
<l>I pray that, with my soul not enslaved by attraction or repulsion,
<pb id=pb15 n=15 facs="f:023"><l>I may hold fast to your teaching, O protectors,
<l>And may always put my best energy into the endeavour.
</lg></lg>


<lg>
<head><ab type=divNum>III.</ab> (<hi rend=sc>His Contemporaries</hi>).</head>

<lg>
<l><ab type=verseNum>7.</ab> However, nowadays, in this snow mountain solitude,
<l>(There are those who) whilst promising to follow the teaching themselves,
<l>Regard others, who (equally) follow the teaching, as their veriest enemies.
<l>Such conduct calls forth the deepest sorrow.
</lg>

<lg>
<l><ab type=verseNum>8.</ab> With thoughts wishing the ruin of others
<l>And with souls fettered by fierce ambition,
<l>They nevertheless promise to dwell on the high road.
<l>If we consider this (carefully) it is a matter of shame for all concerned.
</lg>

<lg>
<l><ab type=verseNum>9.</ab> These malignant beings,
<l>Angry because they find themselves in their old age in the wrong road,
<l>And raging from the bottom of their hearts
<l>Against those persons who have (duly) acted conform to the Doctrine,
<l>Has not a demon entered their minds?
</lg></lg>


<lg>
<head><ab type=divNum>IV.</ab> (<hi rend=sc>His Pupils</hi>).</head>

<lg>
<l><ab type=verseNum>10.</ab> Not to take steps to conquer the enemy, sin,
<l>But yet after mere reproach to flare up in reply,
<l>That is as silly as,
<l>When an evil spirit is at the Eastern door,
<l>To throw the ransom towards the Western door.
</lg>

<lg>
<l><ab type=verseNum>11.</ab> Those virtue-friends who understand that this is so,
<l>Think of all embodied beings in general with kindness,
<l>But saintly thoughts especially of all who devote themselves to the Doctrine.
<l>And they subdue the enemy residing within, sin.
</lg>

<lg>
<l><ab type=verseNum>12.</ab> O, my followers and friends,
<l>Whilst not letting your souls remain fallen after a lapse,
<l>But whilst examining (yourselves constantly) whether your minds keep to righteousness,
<l>To remain on the straight road, that surely is good.
</lg></lg>


<lg>
<head><ab type=divNum>V.</ab> (<hi rend=sc>Final Prayer</hi>).</head>

<lg>
<l><ab type=verseNum>13.</ab> May all those who believe in these words,
<l>With a mind bent on the drawing on of all beings by means of love and mercy,
<pb id=pb16 n=16 facs="f:024"><l>Through the (direct) vision of the actionless state of (pure) knowledge,
<l>Speedily obtain (that) glorious, supreme saintship.
</lg>


<lg>
<head><ab type=divNum>VI.</ab> (<hi rend=sc>Final Blessing</hi>).</head>

<lg>
<l><ab type=verseNum>14.</ab> He, whose body blazes with the marks and beauties (as of a Buddha),
<l>Whose speech is adorned with the sixty branches of melody,
<l>Whose deep and wide mind, indeed, is a treasury of omniscient love,
<l>May that glorious teacher&apos;s blessing be on us.
</lg></lg></lg>


<p>The above was composed by the Great Omniscient Clergy Perfection Good-Glory as a song in loving memory.

<p rend="align(center)">Blessing.





<div2 n=E>
<head><ab type=divNum>E.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Glossary and Notes.</hi></head>

<head type=sub>(<hi>Lexicographical, Syntactical and Material.</hi>)</head>


<p><BO>kug </BO> see <BO>kyu </BO>.

<p><BO>kun gyis khrel ba'i rgyu </BO>, 32. Not so much &lsquo;a matter of shame to all&rsquo; (= all the people who look at or into the matter, the beholders, the general public, or even humanity in general), but rather &lsquo;a matter of all (of them) being ashamed,&rsquo; i.e. the people <hi>doing</hi> the shameful acts, the people concerned, engaged in this conduct, not the public in general.

<p><BO>kun slong </BO>, 29. Here thought, conception, wish (<hi>cf.</hi> D. <foreign lang=nl>opwelling</foreign>). (Desg. &lsquo;all-enveloping,&rsquo; i.e. &lsquo;natural corruption or sin,&rsquo; p. 8<hi>b</hi>, but <BO>kun slong </BO> = <BO>nyon mong gi slong </BO>, &lsquo;excitement of passion&rsquo; on p. 1044<hi>a</hi>). See also S. Ch. D., p. 29<hi>b</hi>, <choice><sic><SA>samutpada</SA></sic><corr><SA>samutpaada</SA></corr></choice>, but Schroeter, p. 2<hi>b</hi>, &lsquo;approbation, assent, the consenting to any proposition.&rsquo;

<p><BO>ko ko </BO> see <BO>glud </BO><corr>.</corr>

<pb id=pb17 n=17 facs="f:025"><p><BO>kyang </BO>, 30. Here equal to <BO>yin na yang </BO>, &lsquo;yet, however, nevertheless.&rsquo;

<p><BO>kyu </BO>, 20. Not as a separate word in J., who gives <BO>kug </BO> and <BO>kyo ba </BO>, the latter after Schmidt. This is the word occurring in the compound <BO>zhabs kyu </BO> the Tibetan <hi>u</hi>-vowel, the &lsquo;foot-hook&rsquo; (not merely honorific of <BO>kyu </BO> as Hannah seems to suggest in his Grammar of the Tibetan Language, p. 4), which J. has under <BO>zhabs </BO>, on p. 472<hi>a</hi>, together with a queried meaning &lsquo;spur&rsquo; (of the foot: &lsquo;<foreign lang=de>ein Sporn</foreign>&rsquo;), taken from Csoma. This latter meaning is unknown to my informants. Bell gives: hook <BO>kug </BO>; fishhook <BO>nya kug </BO>, but iron hook <BO>lcags kyu </BO>. Henderson gives both <BO>khug </BO> and <BO>kyu </BO> for hook, and also <BO>lcags kyu </BO> alone for iron hook. My informants deny the correctness of <BO>khug </BO>. Desg. knows <BO>kug </BO> (<BO>pa </BO>) only as a verb, not as a subst.; he mentions <BO>kyu </BO> as a separate word, subst. hook, and does not mention <BO>kyo ba </BO>. The various articles in the three Dicts. sub <BO>khug </BO> are interesting but the meaning hook is not given in any of them. S. Ch. D. translates <BO>kyo ba </BO> with &lsquo;<SA>a"nku"sa</SA>, a pointed iron hook, a large pin to pierce with,&rsquo; whilst Macdonell in his Sk. dict. translates the Sk. word as &lsquo;hook, goad, stimulus, remedy.&rsquo; (See below s.v. <BO>'dren pa </BO>.) J. under <BO>kug </BO> gives also <BO>lcags kug </BO>, an iron hook, and <BO>nya kug </BO>, a <corr sic="fishi&ndota;g">fishing</corr> hook, but my informants say that the colloquial for fish hook is rather <BO>nya 'dzin ya'i </BO> (or <BO>pa'i </BO>) <BO>lcags kyu </BO> or simply <BO>nya 'dzin </BO> (pr. nyendzin), just as a meat hook (to hang up meat on) is <BO>sha 'dzin </BO> (pr. shendzin). The <BO>ya </BO> in <pb id=pb18 n=18 facs="f:026">the above represents the pronunciation of the more illiterate people.

<p>One of my informants is, however, of opinion that <BO>lcags kyu </BO> does not mean an <hi>iron</hi> hook at all, but hook in general even though it might be made of silver, copper, gold, etc. He compares it with the word wall, <BO>lcags ri </BO>, which is not <corr sic=neccessarily>necessarily</corr> made of iron, and though of stone or earth is still called &lsquo;iron-mountain.&rsquo; Women&apos;s ornaments such as earrings, chains, or necklaces (<BO>ske 'phreng </BO>, pr. kenthang, not in the Dicts. or Bell. As a colloquial word the dengbu might perhaps be left out in writing) may have golden or silver hooks, <BO>gser gyi lcags kyu </BO> or <BO>dngul gyi lcags kyu </BO>. Example: <BO>skye dman 'di la skye 'phreng yag po cig 'dug/_de la gser dang dngul gyi lcags kyu bzhi 'dug </BO>, this woman has a very fine necklace which has four golden and silver hooks (or clasps). Schroeter&apos;s dict., p. 361<hi>b</hi>, already gives <BO>lcags kyu </BO> as <hi>hook</hi> only. The expression <BO>lcags nag </BO> in the sense of mineral, given by Desg., 307<hi>a</hi>, would make us think that <BO>lcags kyu </BO> might perhaps mean metal hook, but see below. S. Ch. D. adds to the confusion. Under <BO>lcags kyu </BO> he gives: (1) iron pin to guide and punish elephants; fish-hook; (2) name of a plant. (His next entry seems improbable, elephant driving and elephant driver for one and the same word). But under <BO>kyu </BO> he defines <BO>lcags kyu </BO> as &lsquo;iron hook, an angle, a fishing-hook.&rsquo; J. has <BO>lcags kyu </BO> under <BO>lcags </BO> and gives &lsquo;an iron hook, esp. fishing-hook, angle; often fig.&rsquo; and in his illustration he translates <BO>chos kyi lcags kyu </BO> simply as &lsquo;hook of grace.&rsquo; <pb id=pb19 n=19 facs="f:027">He marks the word as belonging to the book language. It is curious to note that Schlagintweit in his Rgyal-rabs (title, or introductory verse) translates the word <BO>lcags kyu </BO> with &lsquo;<foreign lang=de>eisernen Hacken</foreign>&rsquo; (p. 25), whilst Schiefner renders the same word correctly on the next page by &lsquo;Hacken&rsquo; alone. But in his new translation of the Rgyal-rabs, H. A. Francke (J.P.A.S.B., Vol. VI, n. 8, p. 397) writes again &lsquo;Iron Hook.&rsquo;

<p>There is still another compound with <BO>kyu </BO>, namely <BO>mtheb kyu </BO>, the name for a component part of the elaborate torma cake structure. It indicates a small piece of dough in the form of the top of the thumb. From all these examples it might be hazarded that the element <BO>kyu </BO> means primarily &lsquo;curve, curved&rsquo; or &lsquo;curvature,&rsquo; and has no substantial meaning like &lsquo;hook&rsquo; or the like. My teachers, however, think that <BO>kyu </BO> by itself is a substantive &lsquo;hook.&rsquo; So it is not clear whether J. is right as against the other Dicts. in not entering the word separately. The above discussion is in any case better entered under the word <BO>kyu </BO>, whether this is really an independent word or not. The fact that S. Ch. D. gives a Sk. equivalent for <BO>kyu </BO> alone, pleads for its separate existence.

<p>My teachers opine that <BO>kyu </BO> as a separate word may occur alone, but their nearest approach to framing a sentence illustrating such a use was one in which they spoke of a wooden hook (made by a jungleman to fish or hunt with) as <BO>shing gi lcags kyu </BO> or more briefly <BO>shing kyu </BO>. So the example was not decisive.

<p><hi>Additional Note</hi>&mdash;<hi>Cf.</hi> the example in Csoma&apos;s Grammar, p 109: <BO>gser gyi lcags sgrog </BO>, golden fetters or chains, lit.: golden iron ropes. See also Ramsay<corr>,</corr> &lsquo;Western Tibet&rsquo;, p. 62:

<p>&lsquo;<hi>To hook</hi>&mdash;ngiákuk táng ches, properly applicable only to a fish caught with a hook, but also used generally&rsquo;, and:

<p>&lsquo;<hi>Hook</hi>&mdash;ngiákuk (fish hook), kuk kuk (a hook of any kind<corr>)</corr>....&rsquo;

<pb id=pb20 n=20 facs="f:028"><p>Query: Is the use of <BO>lcags </BO> merely conventional in several words, as in <BO>lcags khra </BO>, cage (Bell, Walsh &lsquo;Tromowa Dialect&rsquo;), <BO>lcags zam </BO> (iron) bridge, etc.? And is the use of <BO>lcags </BO> perhaps analogous to that of honorific prefixes? <hi>Cf.</hi> the Dutch guilder (<foreign lang=nl>gulden</foreign>) which is made of silver, though its name is derived from &lsquo;gold.&rsquo;

<p><BO>kyo ba </BO> see <BO>kyu </BO><corr>.</corr>

<p><BO>dka' ba </BO>, 7. Difficult, but here rather with some of the meaning of the English &lsquo;hard&rsquo; (hard lines?), the French &lsquo;<foreign lang=fr>dur</foreign>&rsquo;, perhaps L. &lsquo;<foreign lang=la>arduus</foreign>.&rsquo; The meaning is somewhat that the invocation should not be undertaken lightly (God&apos;s name should not be spoken &lsquo;in vain&rsquo;). Conceptions like: grave, serious, weighty, not lighthearted, or commonplace, or flippant, suggest themselves here. It is &lsquo;a serious matter&rsquo; to invoke these teachers.

<p><BO>bka' drin sems pa </BO>, 42. To think <hi>with</hi> kindness <hi>of</hi> or <hi>towards</hi>, or <hi>about</hi> (<BO>la </BO>).

<p><BO>skal ldan </BO>, 11. We have taken this word in the general sense given by J. &lsquo;the pious,&rsquo; though it may equally well be rendered by &lsquo;the fortunate ones,&rsquo; i.e. those who were fortunate enough to hear Tso&ndota; k&mlrcomma;a pa&apos;s preaching or that of his two pupils. One of my informants suggests, however, that <BO>skal ldan </BO> should here be taken more literally as &lsquo;sharers&rsquo;, &lsquo;share-havers&rsquo; in Tso&ndota; k&mlrcomma;a pa&apos;s message and consequently should here be understood as his &lsquo;followers.&rsquo;

<p><BO>sku glud </BO> see <BO>glud </BO><corr>.</corr>

<p><BO>ske 'phreng </BO> see <BO>kyu </BO><corr>.</corr>

<p><BO>skyabs re sa </BO>, 19. May either be taken as two separate words &lsquo;protection and hope&rsquo; or as a compound &lsquo;hope for protection,&rsquo; &lsquo;protection-hope.&rsquo; More accurately &lsquo;the spot (place = persons in this case) in whom I place my hope for protection, to whom I resort or go, in whom I trust, for protection.<corr>&rsquo;</corr> (<hi>cf.</hi> D. <foreign lang=nl>heul, toeverlaat</foreign>).

<pb id=pb21 n=21 facs="f:029"><p><BO>skyid glu </BO> see <BO>mgur ma </BO><corr>.</corr>

<p><BO>skye sgo </BO> see <BO>sgo </BO><corr>.</corr>

<p><BO>skye ba </BO>, 4. This is an illustration of the meaning of <BO>skye ba </BO> under <abbr expan="Jäschke&apos;s">J.&apos;s</abbr> 4th sub-heading, 1st division. <BO>dad pa skyes </BO> &lsquo;faith has been born,&rsquo; but here rather &lsquo;becomes active,&rsquo; &lsquo;sprouts,&rsquo; &lsquo;waxes strong,&rsquo; or &lsquo;grows, flames up, intensifies, awakens, arises, stirs.&rsquo; The idea is not, as in a case of Christian conversion, of a state of previously non-existent faith, suddenly arising, but of an existing faith becoming strongly energised, leaping up (&lsquo;an outburst of faith&rsquo;). The <corr sic="colloquíal">colloquial</corr> <BO>dad pa skyes </BO> can be suitably translated by &lsquo;to inspire faith to.&rsquo; For instance <BO>bla ma 'di la dad pa skyes kyi </BO> (<BO>mi </BO>) <BO>'dug </BO>, that lama inspires me with (no) faith. A free translation of <BO>dad pa skye ba </BO> is consequently &lsquo;to have faith in,&rsquo; but in our passage the additional meaning of &lsquo;renewed&rsquo; is implied. Therefore we may also render &lsquo;they call up my faith&rsquo; or &lsquo;renewed faith comes up in me.&rsquo; See the use of this expression in the Tibetan Primer III, p. 7, 1. 8. <BO>de nas kho </BO> (read <BO>khos </BO>) <BO>rgyal po de shin tu bzang por shes te dad pa skyes te phyag grangs med 'tshal nas rgyal pos gnang ba de rnams bdag ga la zhu_/</BO> Then he, recognising that the king was very good, and having gained faith in him, and having prostrated himself numberless times, (asked) how can I request (i.e. take, accept) such (gifts) given by the king.

<p><BO>skyed sgo </BO> see <BO>sgo </BO>.

<p><BO>skyed pa </BO>, 50. To generate, the generation, production. <BO>sems bskyed pa </BO> &lsquo;that which has been produced in the soul,&rsquo; &lsquo;the (completed) productions of the soul&rsquo;; with <BO>dang </BO> = with; &lsquo;with thoughts of, assuming, observing an attitude of, with a mental attitude of or disposition to<corr sic=").">.&rsquo;</corr> <BO>'gro ba rnams byams snying rjes drangs </BO><pb id=pb22 n=22 facs="f:030"><BO>pa'i sems bskyed </BO> (<BO>dang </BO>) is one elaborate substantive, a &lsquo;the-beings-with-kindness-having-drawn-soul-disposition.&rsquo;

<p><BO>skyo ba </BO>, 28. Here not in J.&apos;s sense &lsquo;to be weary,&rsquo; but as Desg. and S. Ch. D. have it &lsquo;sadness, grief, sorrow,&rsquo; or adj. &lsquo;sad&rsquo;, etc. In seeing a half-naked beggar, it may be said: <BO>mi 'di skyo ba la kho la dug log yang mi 'dug </BO>. Here the word is adjective: &lsquo;that unhappy (unfortunate, wretched, miserable) man has not even a coat.&rsquo; [<BO>dug log </BO> (Bell) = J. <BO>dug po </BO> = <BO>gos lag </BO> = <BO>chu pa </BO> = Desg. <BO>cho pa </BO>, coat, garment, dress; not alone &lsquo;man&apos;s coat,&rsquo; as J. has it, but for both sexes&mdash;J. <abbr>s.v.</abbr> <BO>chu pa </BO>. <BO>chu pa </BO> and <BO>cho pa </BO> both missing in S. Ch. D. <BO>gos lag </BO> is pronounced both golak and gölak. Walsh, Vocabulary Tromowa Dialect, s.v. coat &lsquo;go&rsquo; and &lsquo;golag.&rsquo; My teachers do not know a word <BO>dug po </BO> for coat in Tibetan. Desg. has a <BO>dugs po </BO>, overcoat. S. Ch. D. <BO>dug pa</BO><corr><BO>*</BO></corr> or <BO>dug po </BO> &lsquo;old coat or garment patched up and mended.&rsquo;]

<p><BO>ga gdan </BO> see <BO>gdan </BO>.

<p><BO>kha rtsod </BO> see <BO>gshags 'gyed pa </BO>.

<p><BO>kha gshags 'gyed pa </BO> see <BO>gshags 'gyed pa </BO>.

<p><BO>khug </BO> see <BO>kyu </BO>.

<p><BO>kho bo'i rjes mjug grogs po rnams </BO>, 45. My followers and friends (<hi>cf.</hi> citizens and compatriots), i.e. followers who are also my friends; the same people under two qualifications, not two different groups of people, the friends <hi>and</hi> the followers. See <BO>rjes mjug pa </BO>.

<p><BO>kho mi glud yin </BO> see <BO>glud </BO>.

<pb id=pb23 n=23 facs="f:031"><p><BO>khyed </BO> 18, <BO>khyod </BO> 12, 23. The difference in form is not accidental. <BO>mgon khyod </BO> is a stereotyped <BO>lab lugs </BO>, manner of speech, expression. <BO>yab sras khyed</BO><corr><BO>*</BO></corr>, l. 18, is a normal honorific form. The form <BO>khyod </BO> was described to me as one of intimacy, of utter confidence, as distinct from familiarity and lack of respect. This seems an almost exact parallel to the use of (thou), tu, du in (English), French and German in addressing parents, God, and relations. The following example was given, a quotation from the <BO>bla ma mchod pa'i cho ga </BO>, a little ritual gelukpa book, leaf 12<hi>a</hi>: <BO>khyod ni bla ma khyod ni yi dam khyod ni mkha' 'gro chos skyong ste_/</BO> &lsquo;As thou art our lama, our yi-dam, our &ddotb;&amacr;kin&imacr;, our dharmap&amacr;la ...&rsquo; (prayer addressed to Tso&ndota; k&mlrcomma;a pa). Likewise, in the little prayerbook <BO>rje btsun sgrol ma'i gdung 'bod </BO> (to T&amacr;r&amacr;) we find a few cases of <BO>khyod </BO> (e.g. p. 5<hi>b</hi>) amidst many cases of <BO>khyed </BO><corr>.</corr> In the term <BO>yab sras khyed </BO> the hon. form of the first two syllables of course determines the hon. form of the last. The &lsquo;intimate&rsquo; form <BO>khyod </BO> was further described as &lsquo;the language of religious transport, ardour, fervour,<corr>&rsquo;</corr> <BO>dad pa'i yus </BO>.

<p><BO>khrel gad </BO> (<BO>rgyab pa </BO>) see <BO>khrel ba </BO>.

<p><BO>khrel dgod </BO> see <BO>khrel ba </BO>.

<p><BO>khrel ba </BO>, 32. According to the Dicts. &lsquo;to be ashamed.&rsquo; Desg. and S. Ch. D. do not support J.&apos;s meaning &lsquo;piety&rsquo; and his third meaning &lsquo;disgust, aversion.&rsquo; My oral information rejects these second and third meanings, yet see below. <BO>kun gyis khrel ba'i rgyu </BO>, freely translated &lsquo;is a matter of (cause for) shame to all,&rsquo; literally &lsquo;a-by-all-shame-feeling-cause,&rsquo; i.e. all should feel ashamed. The shame, it should be understood, must be felt, not by all who behold the bad behaviour, but by all who <pb id=pb24 n=24 facs="f:032">are guilty of it. The exact meaning of the root <BO>khrel </BO> from which the verb is derived is not yet satisfactorily dealt with in the Dicts. which are supplementary as well as contradictory in their data. The compounds exhibit a great variety of shades of meaning. That of <BO>khrel med </BO>, for instance, may perhaps cover so wide a range as &lsquo;shameless, impudent, self-willed, stubborn, stiff-necked, arrogant, insolent, ungrateful, loveless, heartless, harsh, cruel, wanton, <foreign lang=de><corr sic=ruchslos>ruchlos</corr>, frech</foreign>.&rsquo; Some of the compounds and applications clearly indicate that <BO>khrel </BO> must also mean &lsquo;sexual modesty, chastity,&rsquo; others that it must mean &lsquo;bashfulness, shyness, timidity&rsquo; (in this sense <BO>khrel med </BO> &lsquo;brazen, forward, unabashed, saucy, bold, audacious&rsquo;). <BO>khrel </BO> seems to come very near to the D. &lsquo;<foreign lang=nl>schroom</foreign>&rsquo; which is more &lsquo;diffidence&rsquo; than &lsquo;scruple,&rsquo; but <BO>khrel med </BO> may in some cases mean &lsquo;unscrupulous&rsquo; or &lsquo;without a conscience.&rsquo; In this sense it comes near to &lsquo;impious.&rsquo; The German subst. &lsquo;<foreign lang=de>Scheu</foreign>&rsquo; may be also compared. It is also averred that in certain combinations a positive statement with <BO>khrel med </BO> is practically identical with the English exclamation: how dare you! how can you!

<p>A compound, difficult to define exactly, is <BO>khrel gzhung med </BO> in which <BO>gzhung </BO> has the meaning, not given in the Dicts. of straight, straightforward, honest, true, dependable, the French &lsquo;droit&rsquo; (<hi>cf.</hi> rectitude). The whole expression may mean &lsquo;abandoned,&rsquo; or simply <BO>khrel med </BO><corr>.</corr> Example <BO>khrel gzhung med pa'i mi de yi tshe de don med red </BO>, &lsquo;the lives of these abandoned (shameless, etc.) men are useless.&rsquo; An old sweetheart who has cast off her lover may be called <BO>khrel gzhung med </BO> &lsquo;the brazen, perfidious girl.&rsquo; Desg. gives <BO>gzhung </BO> in this sense as equal to <BO>bzang </BO>, &lsquo;good, just, generous.&rsquo; This may be Schmidt&apos;s <BO>gzhungs pa </BO> &lsquo;sincere, orderly.&rsquo; In the sentence <BO>pha ma la sku drin 'di 'dra log </BO><pb id=pb25 n=25 facs="f:033"><BO>pa de khrel med kyi sems red </BO>, &lsquo;to <corr sic=render>repay</corr> your parents kindness in this way shows a lack of gratitude,&rsquo; my teachers explain the word as &lsquo;ungrateful, loveless, harsh.&rsquo;

<p>As far as the further meanings of <BO>khrel </BO>, as given in J. (see above), are concerned, P&mlrcomma;un Ts&mlrcomma;ogs maintains that <BO>khrel sems can </BO> = <BO>chos sems can </BO>, &lsquo;pious,&rsquo; but Karma denies it, and the former also states that <BO>khrel yod pa </BO> = <BO>zhen pa log pa </BO>, which latter expression Desg. and S. Ch. D. know as &lsquo;to be disgusted with.&rsquo; But J. and the others render the former expression with <BO>khrel </BO>, as &lsquo;chaste&rsquo; or &lsquo;modest,&rsquo; or as &lsquo;to be chaste,&rsquo; etc. Both of my teachers are at one about the expression <BO>zhe khrel ba </BO> &lsquo;to be weary, tired, sick of.&rsquo; Examples: <BO>lto chas 'di la zhe khrel song </BO>, I am tired of this food. (<BO>lto chas </BO>, pr. tobché, see Henderson&apos;s Manual, Voc., p<corr>.</corr> 48, s.v. food; there written <BO>ltob chas </BO>.) <BO>mi 'di la zhe khrel song </BO>, &lsquo;I have got tired of this man.&rsquo; The sentence <BO>chos thos pas rgyud grol nas_/_khrel yod ngo tsha shes </BO> was explained to me as: Having understood the doctrine, and having been delivered (saved), I am now weary of the world, have renounced the world, know the world for vanity, have turned away from it. For J.&apos;s <BO>khrel gad </BO>, &lsquo;scornful laughter&rsquo;, the synonym <BO>khrel dgod </BO> was given to me, as well as the explanation &lsquo;a laugh to make the other feel ashamed,&rsquo; &lsquo;to make another feel small.&rsquo; We may therefore think of ironic, sarcastic, malicious laughter, or of derision and <foreign lang=de>Schadenfreude</foreign>. <BO>khrel gad rgyab pa </BO>, to laugh at another, at the expense of another, in order to make him ridiculous. This word <BO>khrel </BO> furnishes a very striking test of the present state of Tibetan lexicography, the word <BO>gdan </BO> will furnish another.

<pb id=pb26 n=26 facs="f:034"><p>For words like these a comprehensive collection of authentic illustrations is imperative before finer shades and the exact range of meanings can be fixed. <BO>ngo tsha </BO>, commonly translated as &lsquo;shame,&rsquo; a synonym for <BO>khrel </BO>, is a similarly uncertain word. Compare the translations in J. and S. Ch. D. of this same sentence: <BO>khrel ba dang ngo tsha ba med </BO>, J.: &lsquo;he has no shame nor dread&rsquo;; S. Ch. D.: &lsquo;he has no shame or modesty.&rsquo;

<p><BO>khrel med </BO> see <BO>khrel ba </BO>.

<p><BO>khrel gzhung med </BO> see <BO>khrel ba </BO>.

<p><BO>khrel yod pa </BO> see <BO>khrel ba </BO>.

<p><BO>khrel sems can </BO> see <BO>khrel ba </BO>.

<p><BO>khrod </BO> see <BO>gangs ri'i khrod 'di na </BO> and <BO>'brog </BO>.

<p><BO>mkhyen pa </BO> see <BO>mkhyen brtse </BO>.

<p><BO>mkhyen brtse </BO>, 55. J.&apos;s queried <BO>mkhyen brtse </BO>, quoted from Gyal-rabs: &lsquo;prob.: omniscient-merciful,&rsquo; cannot with any certainty be decided from this passage.

<p>Desg. has <BO>mkhyen brtse</BO><corr><BO>*</BO></corr> = <BO>thugs rje </BO> = &lsquo;knowledge of the heart, i.e. pity, mercy.&rsquo;

<p>S. Ch. D. &lsquo;omniscient mercy.&rsquo;

<p>According to my teachers these are two different words here, knowledge and mercy; not a compound. <BO>mkhyen pa </BO> is here hon. form of <BO>shes pa </BO> to know. But a subst. <BO>mkhyen </BO> is not recorded in the Dicts. Desg. has a <BO>mkhyen pa </BO> = <BO>shes pa </BO> = <BO>rig pa </BO> &lsquo;science, knowledge<corr sic="&rsquo;,">,&rsquo;</corr> and S. Ch. D. also gives <BO>mkhyen pa </BO> as &lsquo;knowledge.&rsquo; In compounds <BO>mkhyen </BO> has usually the verbal value of &lsquo;knowing.&rsquo; The entries s.v. <BO>mkhyen </BO> in the Dicts. need careful comparison and deserve close study.

<pb id=pb27 n=27 facs="f:035"><p><BO>mkhyen pa </BO> is often used in an emphatic sense, to know all, to know through and through, to know with supernatural knowledge (as, for instance, to know what happens from a distance), <hi>cf.</hi> the English adj. &lsquo;knowing.&rsquo;

<p>The shades of meaning: wise, learned, intelligent, sensible, careful, cautious, clever, need further analysis.

<p><BO>'khrug pa </BO>, 35. The value of this word is clear from the Dicts., but there is a difficulty in choosing suitable English words to fit each case in rendering. Such words as the following may be found useful under various circumstances: to be disturbed, upset, disordered (<hi>cf.</hi> disordered brain), unbalanced, deranged, convulsed, in turmoil, tumultuous (a soul in tumult), in revolt, turbulent, wild, seething, in uproar, in the throes of (passion, etc<corr>.</corr>).

<p>And even so none of the above expressions furnishes an easy, idiomatic and close rendering for <BO>rgyud khong nas 'khrugs pa'i mi </BO>, the man whose very character is an utter chaos.

<p><BO>'khur ba </BO>, 21. Ordinarily to carry, but here to carry back, i.e. to repay, render, return.

<p>Example: <BO>pha ma'i drin 'khur dgos </BO>, You must <corr sic=render>repay</corr> your parents their kindness. The verb <BO>'jal ba </BO>, primarily &lsquo;to weigh&rsquo;, is equally so used; see J. s.v. 4. For the above example the word <BO>lan </BO> would ordinarily be inserted, <BO>pha ma'i drin lan 'khur dgos </BO>, but this would lessen the force of the illustration for our purpose as <BO>lan </BO> means here &lsquo;return,&rsquo; and <BO>drin lan</BO><corr><BO>*</BO></corr>, &lsquo;a kindness in return.&rsquo; The above sentence can be expressed in three ways: <BO>pha ma'i drin </BO> (with or without <BO>lan </BO>)<corr sic="," resp=errata></corr> <BO>'khur </BO> (or <BO>'jal </BO>, or <BO>log </BO>)<corr sic="," resp=errata></corr> <BO>dgos </BO>.

<p><BO>gangs ri ma </BO>, title. Mother Snow Mountain. The affixes to <corr><BO>ri </BO></corr> are according to J. <BO>bo </BO> and <BO>ga </BO>; Desg. adds <BO>ngo </BO>; S. Ch. <pb id=pb28 n=28 facs="f:036">D. only <BO>bo </BO>; Bell and Henderson no affix. Of these <BO>bo </BO> gives a definite sense of greatness to the mountain. (See S. Ch. D., Grammar, Introduction, p. 18). Here the particle <BO>ma </BO> is not an inherent part of the substantive, but is added to give a feminine sense to the word, which here means something like &lsquo;Mother Mountain,&rsquo; the big mountain being as it were the mother of all smaller hills and heights around it. My informants were definitely of opinion that, here, &lsquo;Mother Mountain&rsquo; and not &lsquo;Lady Mountain&rsquo; was meant. So we should not understand the expression as &lsquo;Her Majesty or Ladyship the Snow Mountain.&rsquo; The meaning though grammatically important remains better neglected in the translation.

<p><BO>gangs ri'i khrod 'di na </BO>, 25. In this snow-mountain-mass, i.e. monastery. <BO>ri khrod </BO> as monastery in J. s.v. <BO>ri </BO> but not s.v. <BO>khrod </BO><corr>.</corr> Bell has <BO>ri khrod </BO> as &lsquo;cell (of hermit).&rsquo;

<p>Here the expression seems rather to indicate Gendundub&apos;s own monastery (be it Daipung, Tashilhunpo or Namgyalchöde) than Galdan, spoken of in the second verse. See Schulemann, <foreign lang=de>Gesch. der <corr sic=Dailalamas>Dalailamas</corr></foreign>, pp. 92 fll. See <BO>'brog </BO> and <BO>shar </BO>.

<p><BO>go lag </BO> see <BO>skyo ba </BO>.

<p><BO>gol sa </BO>, 33. J. <BO>'gol sa </BO>, error, mistake. In Desg. <BO>'gol sa </BO> or <BO>'gol ba'i gnas </BO>, solitary spot (s.v. <BO>'gol </BO>) and <BO>lam gol </BO> (s.v. <BO>gol </BO>), &lsquo;has lost his way&rsquo;; and also <BO>'gol sar gnas su </BO> to put apart; <BO>'gol lam </BO>, a separate road, a side road (<foreign lang=fr>route détournée</foreign>). According to Desg. only the past form of <BO>'gol ba </BO>, i.e. <BO>gol ba </BO>, means to have erred, gone astray, both physically and morally. S. Ch. D. copies J., but adds to J.&apos;s <BO>'gol sa </BO>, the place where two roads separate: &lsquo;so as to create doubt in the mind regarding the right path.&rsquo; Schroeter (p. 451<hi>a</hi>) has two entries <BO>'gol ba </BO>, &lsquo;remote,&rsquo; and <BO>'gol ba'i gnas </BO>, &lsquo;a closet.&rsquo; J. has the latter expression as &lsquo;a hermitage,&rsquo; <pb id=pb29 n=29 facs="f:037">and Desg., as above, &lsquo;solitary spot.&rsquo; In our passage <BO>lam gol sa </BO> does not mean &lsquo;the mistake as to the road,&rsquo; or Anglice &lsquo;the error of his ways.&rsquo;

<p>In our passage <BO>lam gol </BO> has to be taken together in the sense of <BO>log lam </BO> = <BO>lam log </BO> = <BO>lam ngan </BO>, the wrong road (in a religious sense, in contrast to the <BO>lam mthon po </BO> of l. 31). <BO>lam gol sa </BO> is here to be understood as a &lsquo;wrong-road-place,&rsquo; as the spot or place (<BO>sa </BO> = <BO>sa cha </BO>) <hi>which is</hi>, or proves to be, the wrong road, i.e. the place where one realizes that the road on which one is, is the wrong road, or, perhaps better, that the road is a wrong road (= place) to be in, a wrong-road-spot, indeed.

<p>The meanings, recorded in the Dicts. for compounds with or without initial <BO>'a </BO> of <BO>'gol ba </BO>, seem logical, as one who <hi>has</hi> separated himself from the road<corr>,</corr> <hi>is</hi> astray, <hi>is</hi> mistaken, <hi>is</hi> (in moral or intellectual matters) in the wrong, in error.

<p>Note this example of the use of the verb: <BO>lan rig pa bsgrims nas rgyab ma gtogs 'gol yong ngo </BO>, answer very carefully otherwise you will make a mistake.

<p>[<BO>rig pa bsgrims nas </BO>, &lsquo;having twisted, squeezed, screwed up your brains??&rsquo; = adv., carefully, attentively.]

<p><BO>gos lag </BO> see <BO>skyo ba </BO>.

<p><BO>glu </BO> see <BO>mgur ma </BO>.

<p><BO>glud </BO>, 40. Ransom. Is here rather <BO>glud tshab </BO>, well defined by S. Ch. D., s.v. The meaning of <BO>glud tshab </BO> is probably &lsquo;the ransom (which is thrown to the evil spirit) as a substitute for, representative of (the person on whose behalf the offering is made),&rsquo; J.&apos;s <BO>mi glud </BO> &lsquo;a man&apos;s image which in his stead is cast <pb id=pb30 n=30 facs="f:038">away in the <BO>gtor ma</BO><corr><BO>*</BO></corr>,&rsquo; a ransom in effigy. There are, however, uses of <BO>glud </BO> in which the primary sense is perhaps rather &lsquo;effigy&rsquo; than &lsquo;ransom.&rsquo; In a ritual describing the construction of the torma cake it is said that the <BO>sku glud </BO> (together with many other moulds) must be imprinted on the dough or paste. Here the word seems to mean no more than &lsquo;a mould constituting an effigy of the body.&rsquo; Though all the torma-cake material is thrown away after it has served its purpose, these imprinted effigies do not seem to serve specially as ransoms like the <BO>glud tshab </BO> and <BO>mi glud </BO> quoted above.

<p>As to J.&apos;s queried <BO>kho mi glud yin </BO> (and the slightly different <BO>mi kho glud yin </BO>), this is explained as follows. The first phrase means: he is a lü in human form (a man-lü, <hi>cf.</hi> werwolf; D. <foreign lang=nl>een lü in menschenvorm, menschelijke gedaante</foreign>). <BO>mi kho </BO> means &lsquo;that man, there (with a pointing out by word or finger).&rsquo; For instance: that man John, that king <BO>ko ko </BO>. &lsquo;That man&rsquo; alone would be <BO>mi de </BO><corr>.</corr> But the second phrase would mean: &lsquo;that man so-and-so is a very devil.&rsquo; J.&apos;s rendering of the first phrase as &lsquo;he is a curse, an anathema, one deserving to be cursed&rsquo; seems too strong. Rather &lsquo;an unmitigated nuisance,&rsquo; for, though harsh, it may be said by a mother of her own child when it is naughty and unruly. The sense seems to be &lsquo;devil&rsquo; (as may also be applied to children or wicked grown-ups in English &lsquo;they are true devils<corr sic="&rsquo;,">,&rsquo;</corr> D. &lsquo;<foreign lang=nl>een paar baarlijke duivels</foreign>&rsquo;) and seems to be a case of meaning-shifting from result to cause (pale death!), the lü being the ransom thrown to the evil spirit, Anglice devil. The association does not seem to be that of worthlessness, hatefulness, something good for nothing, only fit to be thrown away like a lü.

<p>As to the above King Koko, this is a facetious name applied (something like thingumbob) to such Tibetans as ape Chinese manners in dress and in other ways. <BO>ko ko </BO> is said to be a Chinese word for Tib. <BO>a jo </BO> or <BO>jo jo </BO>, elder brother. A Tibetan, strutting about in Darjeeling with Chinese cap and <pb id=pb31 n=31 facs="f:039">coat may hear the sarcasm addressed to him: <BO>ko ko lags ga pa phebs kyi yin nam </BO> &lsquo;Well Mr. Chinaman (or John Ch., Uncle Ch.) where are you going to?<corr>&rsquo;</corr> (&lsquo;Mossioo&rsquo; of the mid-Victorian Punch and music hall ditties).

<p><BO>glud tshab </BO> see <BO>glud </BO>.

<p><BO>dga' ldan </BO> see <BO>dge ldan </BO>.

<p><BO>dge ldan </BO>, 6. Clearly printed in both copies, not <BO>dga' ldan </BO>. This name, &lsquo;the virtuous,&rsquo; seems to refer to the Gelukpa sect, though the monastery which is here meant is usually called <BO>dga' ldan </BO>. The relation between the two terms is not quite clear. Grünwedel, in his <corr>&lsquo;</corr><foreign lang=de>Mythologie des Buddhismus</foreign>,<corr>&rsquo;</corr> etc., p. 72, speaks of &lsquo;<foreign lang=de>das Kloster dGa-ldan oder dGe-ldan.</foreign>&rsquo; Günther Schulemann in &lsquo;<foreign lang=de>Die Geschichte der Dalailamas</foreign>,&rsquo; p. 65, speaks of the &lsquo;<foreign lang=de>Schule, die zuerst dGa-ldan-pa, dann aber dGe-ldan-pa oder dGe-lugs-pa, &lsquo;die Tugendsekte&rsquo;, genannt wurde.</foreign>&rsquo; Modern Tibetans seem to know only the name <BO>dga' ldan </BO> for the famous monastery.

<p><BO>dgra nyon mongs </BO>, 37. This is an apposition. The enemies, the sins; the enemies who <hi>are</hi> the sins; &lsquo;these enemies of sins&rsquo; as in &lsquo;these rascals of boys.&rsquo; See <BO>nyon mongs </BO><corr>.</corr>

<p><BO>mgur ma </BO>, title. Its hon. form is <BO>gsung mgur </BO>. As a single word the affix <BO>ma </BO> is required, which may disappear in compounds. Bell gives as meaning of <BO>mgur ma </BO> &lsquo;religious song,&rsquo; Henderson &lsquo;hymn.&rsquo;

<p>As J. points out, the profane song is <BO>glu </BO> and the religious song <BO>mgur ma </BO>. A synonym for <BO>glu </BO> is <BO>gzhes </BO> (not in the three Dicts. but in Bell and Henderson s.v. song).

<p><abbr expan="Sarat Chandra Das&apos;">S. Ch. D.&apos;s</abbr> <BO>glu gzhes </BO> &lsquo;sportive song&rsquo; is not supported by the data in J. or Desg., nor by my informants. They take the <pb id=pb32 n=32 facs="f:040">second part of this compound as a misprint for <BO>gzhes </BO> and hold that <BO>glu gzhes </BO> is a double-form with the meaning of either of its parts: song. The word <BO>mgur ma </BO> has one honorific form, <BO>gsung mgur </BO>. The words <BO>glu </BO> and <BO>gzhes </BO> have each various hon. forms: <BO>gsung gzhes</BO> (recorded in Bell) and <BO>gsung glu </BO>. Desg. has a <BO>gsung mgur </BO>, pleasant song, but my oral information does not support this special meaning.

<p>Note the difference between J. <BO>skyid glu </BO> (s.v. <BO>skyid </BO>), &lsquo;song of joy,&rsquo; and Desg. id. s.v. <BO>glu </BO> &lsquo;<foreign lang=fr>chant érotique</foreign>.&rsquo;

<p>In Redslob&apos;s translation of the Psalms into classical Tibetan, the word <BO>gsung mgur </BO> is used for psalm.

<p>The following table may be useful.


<table id=tbl.32>
<row>
    <cell><seg id=ord>Ordinary</seg>
    <cell><BO>mgur ma </BO>
    <cell>= <seg id=hon>hon.</seg>
    <cell>
    <cell><BO>gsung mgur </BO>
<row>
    <cell rows=3 rend="vertical-align(middle)"><seg copyOf=ord>,,</seg>
    <cell rows=3 rend="vertical-align(middle)"><BO>glu </BO>
    <cell rows=3 rend="vertical-align(middle)">= <seg copyOf=hon>,,</seg>
    <cell rows=3>{
    <cell><BO>mgul glu </BO>
<row>
    <cell><BO>bzhes </BO> (sic.) <BO>glu </BO> (??)
<row>
    <cell><BO>gsung glu </BO>
<row>
    <cell rows=2 rend="vertical-align(middle)"><seg copyOf=ord>,,</seg>
    <cell rows=2 rend="vertical-align(middle)"><BO>gzhes </BO>
    <cell rows=2 rend="vertical-align(middle)">= <seg copyOf=hon>,,</seg>
    <cell rows=2>{
    <cell><BO>gsung gzhes </BO>
<row>
    <cell><BO>mgul gzhes </BO> (<corr sic="("></corr>rare) ??
</table>


<p><BO>'gol ba </BO> see <BO>gol sa </BO>.

<p><BO>'gol sa </BO> see <BO>gol sa </BO>.

<p><BO>'gye ba </BO> and <BO>'gyed pa </BO>, 38. Attention must be drawn to the fact that Desg. identifies <BO>'gyed pa </BO> with <BO>'gye ba </BO> as against J.&apos;s distinction between the two forms as neutral and active. Also that Desg.&apos;s explanation of <BO>g.yul 'gyed </BO> etc., as &lsquo;to put (the <pb id=pb33 n=33 facs="f:041">enemy) to flight in battle,&rsquo; seems more probable than J.&apos;s &lsquo;to fight a battle,&rsquo; etc. The explanation of <BO>'gyed pa </BO>, by <BO>'pham </BO> in the note on <BO>gshags 'gyed pa </BO>, q.v., seems to support this supposition. S. Ch. D. gives as a meaning of <BO>'gyed pa </BO> &lsquo;to institute, set going&rsquo; and translates accordingly <BO>'thab mo 'gyed pa </BO> as &lsquo;to start a combat,&rsquo; as against J. &lsquo;to combat&rsquo; alone. Also <BO>g.yul 'gyed pa po </BO> &lsquo;one who gives battle.&rsquo; Desg. s.v. <BO>g.yul </BO> (p. 923): <BO>g.yul 'thab </BO> or <BO>g.yul 'gyed </BO> &lsquo;to fight in battle, to combat.&rsquo; <hi>Cf.</hi> also J. s.v. <BO>g.yul </BO>. S. Ch. D. copies J. as against Desg. <BO>g.yul 'gyed pa </BO>, &lsquo;to fight a battle.&rsquo; These words <BO>'gye ba </BO> and <BO>'gyed pa </BO>, again, need further investigation supported by quotations (as well as the word <BO>g.yul </BO> with which they are used).

<p><BO>rga ba </BO>, 33. To be old, the state of being old, old age. Example <BO>ske rga na 'chi'i sdug bsngal yod </BO>, &lsquo;the being born, growing old, being ill, dying are sorrows,&rsquo; or &lsquo;birth, old age, illness and death are sorrowful.&rsquo; <hi>Cf.</hi> the treatment of the first four words in J. <BO>rgas pa'i </BO>, with following verb, to be translated as &lsquo;of old age,&rsquo; literally: of (belonging to, attendant on) having become old; for instance, the joys, sorrows, etc., of the state of having become old (of old age) = <BO>rgas pa'i skyid po </BO> (or <BO>sdug po </BO>). This is not the subst. <BO>rgas </BO> or <BO>rgas po </BO> of Desg. J. treats <BO>rga ba </BO> as a verb with <BO>rgas </BO> as a past tense, taking <BO>rgad pa </BO> and <BO>rgan pa </BO> as adjectives from which the usual substantives in <BO>po </BO>, <BO>mo </BO>, etc., are made. Desg. gives the four forms <BO>rga </BO>, <BO>rgad </BO>, <BO>rgan </BO> and <BO>rgas </BO> <pb id=pb34 n=34 facs="f:042">as substantives and has no verb &lsquo;to be old.&rsquo; J.&apos;s analysis seems the more accurate one. J.&apos;s <BO>rgas ka </BO> &lsquo;old age&rsquo; is absent in Desg., whilst this latter has a <BO>rgas </BO> without affix as &lsquo;old man,&rsquo; &lsquo;old age.&rsquo; This word S. Ch. D. has as = <BO>rga ba </BO> &lsquo;old, ripe&rsquo;; whilst he adds <BO>rgas pa </BO> = <BO>rgad po </BO> &lsquo;aged, old; exhausted, infirm; an old man.&rsquo; This group needs proper quotations for final settlement.

<p>My oral information on some of these points is as follows: The use of <BO>rgas </BO> alone, as &lsquo;old, ripe&rsquo; is denied. <BO>rgas pa </BO> does not mean <BO>rgad po </BO> &lsquo;old,&rsquo; because <BO>rgas pa </BO> requires a <BO>lo </BO> &lsquo;grown old in years&rsquo; in that sense. As an independent adjective, however, it means &lsquo;worn out, exhausted, thin, lean, aged, grown older,&rsquo; and is in that case an equivalent for <BO>rgad po </BO><corr>.</corr> Troubles make a man <BO>rgas pa </BO> &lsquo;age him&rsquo;; make him <hi>as if</hi> old. Age makes a man <BO>rgad po </BO>, old, i.e. <hi>really</hi> old. For the use of <BO>rgas ka </BO> the following two illustrations were given: <BO>rgas ka'i dus la las 'di 'dra ma byed </BO> &lsquo;don&apos;t do such work (or things: or don&apos;t behave in that manner) in your old age;<corr>&rsquo;</corr> <BO>rgas ka shi ba'i dus la bsam blo ngan pa ma thong </BO>, &lsquo;don&apos;t think bad (evil) thoughts in your old age when (whilst) death is drawing near.&rsquo;

<p><BO>rgad </BO>, <BO>rgan </BO>, <BO>rgas </BO> see <BO>rga ba </BO>.

<p><BO>rgya </BO> (or <BO>rgyal </BO>) <BO>sgo </BO> see <BO>sgo </BO>.

<p><BO>rgyan mkhan po </BO> see <BO>rgyan pa </BO>.

<p><BO>rgyan cha </BO> see <BO>rgyan pa </BO>.

<p><BO>rgyan rnams </BO> see <BO>rgyan pa </BO>.

<pb id=pb35 n=35 facs="f:043"><p><BO>rgyan pa </BO> and <BO>brgyan pa </BO>, 54. The treatment of these words in the Dicts. seems unsatisfactory. None of the Dicts. give a passive verb <BO>rgyan pa </BO> or <BO>brgyan pa </BO> &lsquo;being adorned, being decked out, embellished,&rsquo; etc. J. has only <BO>rgyan </BO> as a subst. &lsquo;ornament, decoration,&rsquo; and a verb <BO>brgyan pa </BO> &lsquo;to adorn, decorate, provide with.&rsquo; According to this his own example <BO>nya mgo sa yis brgyan pa </BO> should not mean, as he says, &lsquo;the letter <hi>nya</hi> (<BO>nya </BO>) being provided with an <hi>S</hi> above it&rsquo; (= <BO>snya </BO>), but rather something like &lsquo;to adorn the letter <hi>nya</hi> with a <hi>sa</hi> as a topletter.&rsquo;

<p>Desg. knows a verb <BO>rgyan pa </BO> or <BO>rgyan rgyab </BO> (or <BO>byed </BO> or <BO>bkod </BO>) with the meaning of &lsquo;to adorn,&rsquo; with a past tense <BO>brgyan </BO>, &lsquo;ornavi, ornatus, orné,&rsquo; whatever that means. He and J. quote also a <BO>rgyan gyis brgyan pa </BO> &lsquo;adorned,&rsquo; in which the <BO>rgyan </BO> has clearly a substantival value, like in <BO>rgyan med pa </BO>, &lsquo;without adornment, unadorned.&rsquo;

<p><abbr>S.v.</abbr> <BO>brgyan </BO> Desg. says: &lsquo;<foreign lang=la>praet. verbi <BO>rgyan par </BO>, ornatus, et v. act. ornare, orné, orner</foreign>,&rsquo; and he adds <BO>brgyan pa </BO> or <BO>cha </BO> &lsquo;ornament.&rsquo; Bell has <BO>rgyan cha </BO> for ornament. But J. knows no <BO>brgyan pa </BO> or <BO>cha </BO> as substantives and refers expressly to the unprefixed <BO>rgyan </BO> for the substantives. He further equates <BO>rgyan cha </BO> and <BO>rgyan rnams </BO> &lsquo;ornaments&rsquo; (plural). Under <BO>'dogs pa </BO>, &lsquo;to put on,&rsquo; we find further <BO>rgyan 'dogs pa </BO>, to put on gay clothes, finery (s.v. <BO>rgyan </BO>, the same expression is translated as &lsquo;to adorn one&apos;s self,&rsquo;) and <BO>rgyan bzang po btags pa </BO>, &lsquo;beautifully attired&rsquo; (Mil.). If these translations are idiomatically true we should expect <pb id=pb36 n=36 facs="f:044">(<BO>ba</BO>) <BO>rkyan </BO> to have a wider sense than the English ornament, rather anything beautiful or fine, whether ornaments (in the sense of trinkets) or not. The word adornment would fit better. (<hi>Cf.</hi> D. <foreign lang=nl>tooi</foreign>, G. <corr sic=Smuck resp=errata lang=de>Schmuck</corr>.)

<p>Desg. gives no example of <BO>rgyan pa </BO> with a clearly active value of the verb &lsquo;to ornament,&rsquo; but both in J. and Desg. such examples are given under <BO>brgyan pa </BO>. Desg. gives as synonyms <BO>legs byed </BO> and <BO>mdzes byed </BO> and it is a question whether in these expressions <BO>byed </BO> can have the neuter sense of &lsquo;to act as&rsquo; = &lsquo;to be&rsquo; (like in <BO>rgyal po byed pa </BO>). S. Ch. D. (who has several misprints in his syns. for <BO>rgyan </BO>) quotes s.v. <BO>'god pa </BO> (292<hi>b</hi>) a <BO>brgyan dgod pa </BO>, &lsquo;to arrange ornaments (tastefully); to decorate, adorn, to construct or adjust grammatical forms, sentences, (Zam.).&rsquo; This latter use of <BO>brgyan </BO> is evidently the clue to the expression, quoted elsewhere by Desg. and S. Ch. D.: <BO>rgyan mkhan po </BO>, <choice><sic><SA>ala.mkarapa.n.dita</SA></sic><corr><SA>ala.mkaarapa.n.dita</SA></corr></choice>, one versed in rhetoric, a clever orator. The equation <BO>rgyan pa </BO> = <BO>bzhag pa </BO> (in the modern language, v. Bell, to put, place), given by S. Ch. D. is denied by both my teachers, though confirmed by Desg.; they know of no Tibetan word of this spelling and sound with the meaning bejewelled, adorned, decorated, as is the correct translation of the <corr sic="Skr.">Sk.</corr> equivalent cited, <SA>ma.n.dita</SA>. Yet may <BO>rgyan </BO> (<BO>pa </BO>) perhaps mean &lsquo;an ornamented object&rsquo;, hence &lsquo;die, dice&rsquo;; hence again Desg. &lsquo;<foreign lang=fr>objets mêlés pour tirer les sorts</foreign>&rsquo;, and lastly &lsquo;stake&rsquo; (in gambling) and &lsquo;lot&rsquo;? This first meaning is not in the Dicts. but would settle the question discussed a few lines lower down, and explain those combinations with <BO>rgyan </BO> which refer to gambling and divination. In connection with the immediately following articles in S. Ch. D., <BO>rgyan bzhag mkhan</BO><corr><BO>*</BO></corr>, &lsquo;one who joins in a wager, gambler&rsquo; [one who puts up his jewels, ornaments for <pb id=pb37 n=37 facs="f:045">a stake?], and <BO>rgyan dor ba </BO> or <BO>bzhag pa </BO>, &lsquo;a dice-rogue, a gamester, one who throws dice,&rsquo; etc., it should be ascertained whether there is a Tibetan word with <BO>rgyan </BO> which means die, dice, or whether the combinations refer to the staking of ornaments and jewels in gambling.

<p>S.v. <BO>brgyan pa </BO> S. Ch. D. gives no news, treating this word, however, as a verb, and referring to <BO>rgyan </BO> for the subst.

<p>As a result of this little investigation we come to the conclusion that it is legitimate to inquire whether there is not a Tibetan verb <BO>rgyan pa </BO> (more likely than <BO>brgyan pa </BO>) with the passive or neuter sense of &lsquo;being decked out, being ornamented or adorned, showing gaily.&rsquo; What would render such a word exactly in English is difficult to see, unless we coin a verb &lsquo;to splendiferate,&rsquo; but D. <foreign lang=nl>pronken (pronken in vollen luister)</foreign> comes near to it. Other related words would be: to blaze forth, to shine out, to cut a dash, or else to swagger, to swank, to preen, to strut, or again to be graced with or by, to show forth, etc., but especially &lsquo;to display&rsquo; in the technical zoological sense.

<p>An instructive illustration in this matter is furnished by the following two sentences, both with the same meaning: <BO>thang ka ri mos brgyan 'dug </BO>, or <BO>thang ka 'di la ri mos brgyan 'dug </BO>, of which the best idiomatic translation is: O, what a fine picture!; how fine is the painting (drawing) of (in) (this) picture!

<p>But the psychological translation is in the first case: &lsquo;This picture is by-lines-(fine<corr sic="-"></corr>)-displaying&rsquo;, and in the second case: &lsquo;To this picture there is a by-the-lines-(drawings)-ornamentation (or display).&rsquo;

<p><BO>rgyal sgo </BO> see <BO>sgo </BO>.

<p><BO>rgyal ba </BO>, 6. According to J., III, also &lsquo;superior, excellent, eminent.&rsquo; <BO>rnam par rgyal ba </BO>, &lsquo;most excellent, illustrious.&rsquo; This may be the meaning here. Whether there is a connection between the word as used here and the <BO>rgyal ba </BO> title of the Dalai Lamas may be left undecided.

<pb id=pb38 n=38 facs="f:046"><p><BO>rgyud </BO>, 30. Here character, heart, disposition, etc. It is curious that this meaning, given by J. and Desg., is absent in S. Ch<corr>.</corr> D.

<p><BO>sgo </BO>, 39, 40. Door. Though the average Tibetan house (if it be not a mere hut) has two doors<corr sic=.>,</corr> a front door and a back door, they are not on a principle located in the eastern and western sides of the house. For the text the words east and west have no special significance; they are simply used <BO>dpe 'dra po </BO>, by way of speech, as an example, illustration or comparison.

<p>The front (main, public) door is called <BO>gzhung sgo </BO> or <BO>rgya </BO> (or <BO>rgyal </BO>) <BO>sgo </BO>. The first word is interpreted as the &lsquo;main,&rsquo; &lsquo;public,&rsquo; or &lsquo;middle&rsquo; door; the second as the &lsquo;wide&rsquo; or &lsquo;royal&rsquo; door. The back door is called <choice><sic><BO>ltagsgo </BO></sic><corr><BO>ltag sgo </BO></corr></choice> (in J. s.v. <BO>ltag pa </BO>), which is explained as &lsquo;the door for horses and cattle.&rsquo; The <BO>skyed sgo </BO> quoted by J., p. 29<hi>b</hi>, is unknown to my informants. They only know a <choice><sic><BO>skyesgo </BO></sic><corr><BO>skye sgo </BO></corr></choice>, &lsquo;the door leading to birth, or re-birth.&rsquo;

<p><BO>sgo gsum </BO> see <BO>gsung </BO>.

<p><BO>sgrim pa </BO> see <BO>gol sa </BO>.

<p><BO>brgyan pa </BO> see <BO>rgyan pa </BO>.

<p><BO>nges par </BO> (<BO>du </BO>) see <BO>cis kyang </BO> and <BO>nges so </BO>.

<p><BO>nges so </BO>, 16. With terminative: &lsquo;there is certainty for&rsquo; = &lsquo;it is certain&rsquo; = &lsquo;I am sure of&rsquo;, &lsquo;I know for certain that&rsquo;, &lsquo;it is surely, truly so.&rsquo; A has <BO>ngas </BO> for <BO>nges </BO> in B.

<p>Here, however, <BO>nges so </BO> = <BO>nges par </BO> = <BO>nges par du </BO> = <BO>ngo thog </BO> = <BO>ngon nas </BO> = &lsquo;indeed, truly, really, forsooth.&rsquo; Compare also <BO>cis kyang </BO>.

<pb id=pb39 n=39 facs="f:047"><p><BO>ngo chod </BO> see <BO>cis kyang </BO>.

<p><BO>ngo rtog </BO> see <BO>cis kyang </BO>.

<p><BO>ngo thog </BO> see <BO>cis kyang </BO> and <BO>nges so </BO>.

<p><BO>ngo ma </BO> see <BO>cis kyang </BO>.

<p><BO>ngo mo </BO> see <BO>cis kyang </BO>.

<p><BO>ngo tsha </BO> see <BO>khrel ba </BO>.

<p><BO>dngos nas </BO> see <BO>cis kyang </BO>.

<p><BO>mngon par rtogs pa </BO> see <BO>spros bral </BO>.

<p><BO>ci myur </BO> see <BO>myur </BO>.

<p><BO>cis kyang </BO>, 48. (Also <BO>cis nas kyang </BO>). Here rather with the meaning &lsquo;without fail, for sure, indeed, surely&rsquo; in addition to J.&apos;s &lsquo;anyhow, by all means.&rsquo; It is said to be synonymous with <BO>nges par du </BO> and colloquial <BO>ngo thog </BO>, as, for instance, in: <BO>ngo thog pheb rogs gnang </BO>, &lsquo;I ask (you) to come without fail, indeed, surely, for sure, so that I may count on it.&rsquo; Also <BO>rten ldan </BO>. <hi>Cf.</hi> Desg. in addition to J.&mdash;J. (p. 129<hi>b</hi>) has the spelling <BO>ngo rtog </BO>. Bell s.v. &lsquo;certainly&rsquo; <BO>ngo thog </BO> (syn. <BO>rten ldan </BO>); s.v. &lsquo;indeed&rsquo; (syn. <BO>rten rten </BO>); s.v. &lsquo;surely&rsquo; <BO>nges par </BO>; s.v. &lsquo;actual&rsquo; <BO>ngo thog </BO>; s.v. &lsquo;real&rsquo; <BO>ngo thog </BO> (syn. <BO>dngos nas </BO>); s.v. &lsquo;really&rsquo; <BO>nges par </BO>. Desg. <BO>ngo thog yin </BO> &lsquo;natural, not manufactured,&rsquo; but <BO>ngo thog </BO> (next article) &lsquo;certitude&rsquo; = <BO>ngo ma </BO>, <BO>ngo mo </BO> or <BO>ngo chod </BO>. S. Ch. D. <BO>ngo thog </BO> &lsquo;true, genuine, really.&rsquo; <BO>rten ldan </BO> and <BO>rten rten </BO> are not in the Dicts. <BO>ngo mo </BO> and <BO>ngo chod </BO> are not endorsed by my authorities. See also <BO>nges so </BO>.

<pb id=pb40 n=40 facs="f:048"><p><BO>ces pa </BO>, colophon. According to J. = <BO>ces smras pa </BO>, &lsquo;that which has been spoken,&rsquo; i.e. &lsquo;speech, word,&rsquo; etc. Corresponds very closely to D. &lsquo;<foreign lang=nl>het gesprokene, het gezegde</foreign>&rsquo; or L. &lsquo;<foreign lang=la>dictum</foreign>.&rsquo; Here, however, the meaning may be extended to &lsquo;piece of writing&rsquo; (D. &lsquo;<foreign lang=nl>het geschrevene</foreign>,&rsquo; L. &lsquo;<foreign lang=la>scriptum</foreign>&rsquo;) or perhaps even more generally &lsquo;the above, the foregoing.&rsquo;

<p>The other use of the expression, as an abbreviation for <BO>ces bya ba </BO>, &lsquo;the so-called,&rsquo; is here, of course, not applicable.

<p><BO>gcig pu </BO> (or <BO>po </BO>) see <BO>dwangs mar </BO>.

<p><BO>lcags kyu </BO> see <BO>kyu </BO>.

<p><BO>lcags nag </BO> see <BO>kyu </BO>.

<p><BO>lcags ri </BO> see <BO>kyu </BO>.

<p><BO>chags sdang </BO>, 22. In J. &lsquo;love and hatred,&rsquo; but here better &lsquo;attraction (for the pleasant) and repulsion (for the unpleasant),&rsquo; in other words: &lsquo;non-attachment (to weal and woe), indifference (to the ups and downs of life),&rsquo; or again &lsquo;bondage&rsquo; (to emotions, impressions, etc.). S. Ch. D. has &lsquo;passion for, passionate attachment.&rsquo; It is the German &lsquo;<foreign lang=de>Lust und Unlust</foreign>.&rsquo;

<p><BO>chu gter </BO> see <BO>gter </BO>.

<p><BO>chu pa </BO> see <BO>skyo ba </BO>.

<p><BO>cho pa </BO> see <BO>skyo ba </BO>.

<p><BO>chos kyi dbyings </BO> see <BO>spros bral </BO>.

<p><BO>chos tshul bzhin </BO>, 34. To be construed: <BO>chos </BO> + <BO>tshul bzhin </BO> (<BO>pa </BO> or <BO>du </BO>), and not as <BO>chos tshul </BO> + <BO>bzhin </BO>, etc.

<p><BO>chos mdzad </BO> (<BO>mkhan </BO>), 43. Here most likely in the stricter sense those who have devoted, given, themselves (entirely) to the religious life, i.e. those who have entered the order, the <BO>dge slong </BO> or even <BO>grwa pa </BO>, learners, pupils, lay-brothers. <hi>Cf.</hi> however, <pb id=pb41 n=41 facs="f:049">J. s.v. <BO>chos byed pa </BO>, p. 163<hi>a</hi>, and Desg. who has a subst. <BO>chos mdzad </BO>, &lsquo;lamaist dignity, rank,&rsquo; p. 333<hi>b</hi>.

<p><BO>chos zab </BO>, 10. Stands here for <BO>zab pa'i chos </BO>, or <BO>chos zab mo </BO>, &lsquo;the deep, profound, doctrine, teaching, religion.&rsquo; Perhaps an allusion to the <BO>zab lam </BO>, the &lsquo;profound doctrine of Buddhism as explained in the Tantras&rsquo; (S. Ch. D. s.v. <BO>zab lam </BO>). J<corr>.</corr> renders it &lsquo;a term of Buddhist mysticism, doctrine of witchcraft,&rsquo; whilst Desg. translates the term as &lsquo;<foreign lang=la>doctrina magica</foreign>.&rsquo; <BO>chos zab </BO> instead of <BO>zab chos </BO> perhaps for metrical reasons; in ordinary speech the inversion seems not usual. See also <BO>zab pa </BO>.

<p><BO>chos sems can </BO> see <BO>khrel ba </BO>.

<p><BO>mchod gdan </BO> see <BO>gdan </BO>.

<p><BO>'chang ba </BO>, 46. &lsquo;To hold, to keep, to stick to, adhere to.&rsquo; <BO>ma 'chang bar </BO> &lsquo;not keeping (it) so, not preserving, maintaining (it) in that (the same) state, not letting (it) continue in the same way, not keeping up the state of, not persisting in (the same way)&rsquo; etc.

<p>Freely translated by its reverse: rectifying, redressing, correcting, changing (one&apos;s attitude, condition, action, etc., previously referred to).

<p><BO>'chad nyan pa </BO> see <BO>bshad nyan </BO>.

<p><BO>mjug </BO> see <BO>rjes mjug pa </BO>.

<p><BO>'jug </BO> see <BO>rjes mjug pa </BO>.

<p><BO>rjes mjug pa </BO>, 45. Not in the Dicts., lit. &lsquo;after-track,&rsquo; is here, &lsquo;followers, pupils, disciples, adherents.&rsquo; Though <BO>'jug </BO> is sometimes used for <BO>mjug </BO>, see J. 177<hi>a</hi>, last line, the word <pb id=pb42 n=42 facs="f:050"><BO>rjes 'jug </BO>, &lsquo;affix, final consonant,&rsquo; a grammatical term, is of course different, as well as J.&apos;s adj. &lsquo;following, coming after.&rsquo;

<p>The word has also the meaning &lsquo;orphan&rsquo; (those left behind). See also under <BO>kho bo'i </BO>, etc.

<p><BO>brjod pa </BO> see <BO>mtshan brjod pa </BO>.

<p><BO>nya kug </BO> see <BO>kyu </BO>.

<p><BO>nyon mongs </BO>, 37. Here &lsquo;sin&rsquo; or &lsquo;vice&rsquo; are to be understood as either the <hi>three</hi> sins, or vices, or failings, or defects, or frailties, <BO>nyon mongs gsum</BO>, &lsquo;lust, anger and stupidity&rsquo; (in the conventional rendering), <BO>'dod chags </BO>, <BO>zhe sdang </BO>, <BO>gti mug </BO>, or the five sins, <BO>nyon mongs lnga </BO>, namely the three mentioned above with the addition of <BO>nga rgyal </BO> &lsquo;pride&rsquo; and <BO>phrag dog </BO> &lsquo;envy&rsquo; as fourth and fifth.

<p>See also <BO>dgra nyon mongs </BO>.

<p><BO>mnyen </BO> see <BO>bshes gnyen </BO>.

<p><BO>snying po </BO> see <BO>byang chub snying po </BO>.

<p><BO>snying rus byed pa </BO> see <BO>brtson par bgyid pa </BO>.

<p><BO>snyoms las 'dzin pa </BO>, 13. Equals <BO>snyoms las byed </BO> (or <BO>dran </BO>) <BO>pa </BO> = &lsquo;to be ease-loving, indolent, lazy.&rsquo;

<p><BO>gting nas </BO>, 28. &lsquo;From the bottom&rsquo; (sc. of the heart), hence expressions like <BO>skyo ba gting nas skyes </BO> may be simply translated &lsquo;a deep pity (or sadness) arises, I become very sad, I am very sorry.&rsquo; See<corr sic="-"> </corr>also <BO>skyo ba </BO>.

<p><BO>gter </BO>, 55. Here perhaps better &lsquo;treasure heap&rsquo; than mere &lsquo;treasure,&rsquo; or perhaps even &lsquo;treasury.&rsquo; S. Ch. D. gives as <pb id=pb43 n=43 facs="f:051">meanings: &lsquo;treasure&rsquo; and &lsquo;store-place,&rsquo; in this deviating from J. and Desg. S. Ch. D.&apos;s example <BO>chu gter </BO>, &lsquo;the repository of water, the ocean&rsquo;, seems to prove his additional explanation.

<p><BO>rtag dpyad </BO> see <BO>rtog dpyod </BO>.

<p><BO>rten rten </BO> see <BO>cis kyang </BO>.

<p><BO>rten ldan </BO> see <BO>cis kyang </BO>.

<p><BO>rten pa </BO>, 49. (Pf. and ft. <BO>brten </BO>). Has here simply the primary meaning &lsquo;to adhere to,&rsquo; more colloquially, &lsquo;to stick to,&rsquo; or &lsquo;to keep to, hold fast to, to heed, to observe.&rsquo; May, however, here be also taken as Desg.&apos;s &lsquo;to believe in, to trust&rsquo; (in the sense of &lsquo;to rely on&rsquo;) according to his example <BO>khyed kyi gsung la rten pas </BO>, &lsquo;I believe, trust (in) your words&rsquo; (p. 420<hi>a</hi>), or otherwise: to put reliance on (what another says, states, preaches, teaches).

<p><BO>rtog pa </BO>, 32. (Pf. <BO>brtags </BO>). May almost be translated here as &lsquo;to contemplate, to consider&rsquo; (&lsquo;if one comes to think about it&rsquo; or &lsquo;if one looks into that matter&rsquo;), but not merely as &lsquo;to behold, to see.&rsquo;

<p><BO>rtog dpyod </BO>, 47. Evidently the same as J.&apos;s. <BO>brtags dpyod </BO> &lsquo;examination, trial&rsquo; (214<hi>b</hi>). J. has a verb <BO>brtag dpyod </BO> (or <BO>rtog gzhig </BO>) <BO>gtong ba </BO>, occurring in the Padma t&mlrcomma;a&ndota; yig and in Milaraspa, with the meaning &lsquo;to examine, search into<corr>,</corr> see whether or whether not.&rsquo; J. has also the forms <BO>rtog dpyod </BO> and <BO>brtag dpyad </BO>, both subst. &lsquo;examination,&rsquo; s.v. <BO>dpyod pa </BO>, &lsquo;to examine,&rsquo; p. 329<hi>a</hi>.

<p>Desg. gives <BO>rtog dpyad </BO> as syn. with <BO>rtog pa </BO>, &lsquo;to consider, test, judge&rsquo;; <BO>brtags dpyod </BO>, &lsquo;examination, judgment.<corr>&rsquo;</corr>

<pb id=pb44 n=44 facs="f:052"><p>S. Ch. D. <BO>rtog dpyod </BO> (= <BO>bsam mno </BO>, or <BO>mno bsam </BO>) &lsquo;consideration, examination, trial,&rsquo; and (558<hi>a</hi>) <BO>brtag dpyad </BO> (= <BO>zhib dpyad </BO>), &lsquo;examination, careful weighing of all the details of a case, deliberation.&rsquo; S. Ch. D. seems to treat <BO>rtog dpyod </BO> and <BO>brtag dpyad </BO> as two quite different words. S.v. <BO>dpyod pa </BO> he has further <BO>rtog dpyod pa </BO>, &lsquo;to examine anything,&rsquo; and <BO>brtag dpyad </BO>, &lsquo;investigation, inquiry.&rsquo;

<p><BO>rtogs pa </BO> see <BO>spros bral </BO>.

<p><BO>lta ba </BO> 51. This word seems here to mean &lsquo;vision, illumination, (direct mystical) contemplation, the seeing face to face.&rsquo; In our passage it is the direct vision (the &lsquo;vision direct&rsquo;), proper to, inherent in, characteristic of, belonging to, the knowledge pertaining to the actionless (or undifferentiated) state, the &lsquo;passive-state-knowledge-vision.&rsquo; See also <BO>spros bral </BO><corr>.</corr>

<p><BO>ltag sgo </BO> <corr sic=See>see</corr> <BO>sgo </BO>.

<p><BO>lto chas </BO> see <BO>khrel ba </BO>.

<p><BO>lto gdan </BO> see <BO>gdan </BO>.

<p><BO>ltob chas </BO> see <BO>khrel ba </BO>.

<p><BO>stong pa nyid </BO> see <BO>spros bral </BO>.

<p><BO>brtag dpyad </BO> see <BO>rtog dpyod </BO>.

<p><BO>brtag dpyod gtong ba </BO> see <BO>rtog dpyod </BO>.

<p><BO>brtags dpyod </BO> see <BO>rtog dpyod </BO>.

<p><BO>bstan pa </BO> (<BO>gnyis </BO>) see <BO>lam rim </BO>.

<p><BO>bstan pa 'dzin pa </BO>, 23. &lsquo;To follow, to keep to the teaching; to be or remain true, faithful to the teaching, to hold fast to it, to stick to it.&rsquo; See also <BO>rten pa </BO>.

<pb id=pb45 n=45 facs="f:053"><p><BO>thabs </BO> see <BO>'dul thabs </BO>.

<p><BO>thams cad mkhyen pa chen po dge 'dun grub dpal bzang po </BO>, lit. &lsquo;Great-all-knowing-clergy-perfection-good-glory,&rsquo; corresponds to a Sk. Mah&amacr;-sarva-jña-sa&mdota;gha-siddhi-shr&imacr;-bhadra. See for literature about him: Schulemann, <foreign lang=de>Geschichte der Dalailamas</foreign>, pp. 91&ndash;92, note 11, and S. Ch. D.: The Hierarchy of the Dalai Lamas, J.A.S.B., Vol. LXXIII, Pt. I, extra No., p. 81.

<p><BO>thugs ni zab yangs mkhyen brtse'i gter </BO>, 55. This is here, in my opinion, not a sort of Hottentotten&shy;potentaten&shy;tanten&shy;attentater-like formation. I take the <BO>zab yangs </BO> to refer to the <BO>thugs </BO>, a profound and wide mind, whilst the <BO>mkhyen brtse </BO> only refers to the <BO>gter </BO>, the treasury of omniscient mercy. It is not likely that the qualities of width and depth form part of an enumeration of which the remaining items are love and knowledge or even (as a compound) omniscient-mercy. See the various component words in this glossary.

<p><BO>thugs rje </BO> see <BO>mkhyen brtse </BO>.

<p><BO>thugs gzu bo </BO> see <BO>blo gzu bo </BO>.

<p><BO>mtheb kyu </BO> see <BO>kyu </BO>.

<p><BO>mthon po </BO> see <BO>lam mthon po </BO>.

<p><BO>'thab mo 'gyed pa </BO> see <BO>'gye ba </BO>.

<p><BO>dag snang </BO>, 43. J.&apos;s entry under this entry is as follows: &ldquo;<BO>dag </BO> (<BO>pa'i</BO><corr><BO>*</BO></corr>) <BO>snang </BO> (<BO>ba </BO>) <hi>Schr.</hi> &lsquo;good opinion&rsquo; (?), prob.: a pure, sound view or knowledge <hi>Glr.</hi>; in <hi>Mil.</hi> it has a similar meaning.&rdquo; He adds an oral sentence: &ldquo;&ast;dhag-ná&ndota; jón-wa&ast; C. to lead a holy life.&rdquo; (sic. jón = jó&ndota;?) Schroeter has (135<hi>b</hi>): &ldquo;<BO>dag snang </BO>, a good opinion, a good conception of any thing, a conceit, a thought.&rdquo; [Based on an Italian &lsquo;<foreign lang=it>concetto</foreign>&rsquo;?] He has two further entries &lsquo;<BO>dag pa'i snang ba </BO>, to form a good <pb id=pb46 n=46 facs="f:054">opinion of any individual,&rsquo; and  &lsquo;<BO>dag snang spyong </BO> (read: <BO>sbyong </BO>) <BO>ba </BO>, to form a good opinion, or to conceive well of any one.&rsquo;

<p>In our passage we are inclined to take <BO>snang </BO> as <BO>snang ba </BO>, as &lsquo;view, thought, idea, conception,&rsquo; etc., and <BO>sbyong ba </BO> = &lsquo;to exercise, practise, perform&rsquo;, or even &lsquo;to entertain, cherish (thoughts).&rsquo; <BO>dag </BO> we take as <BO>dag pa </BO>, &lsquo;pure&rsquo;&mdash;the connection with thought not the opposite of false, erroneous, but of bad, cruel, unkind. So here the expression seems to mean &lsquo;to think with goodwill, with kindness (of others),<corr>&rsquo;</corr> not the colloquial &lsquo;to have a good opinion of, to think well of.&rsquo; To think &lsquo;good&rsquo; is here the opposite of to think &lsquo;evil,&rsquo; but the idiomatic value of the expression &lsquo;to think well of&rsquo; (as the opposite of &lsquo;to think poorly of&rsquo;) would make the latter rendering misleading. The real value, then, of the expression as used in this passage, seems to be: &lsquo;to think good, kind thoughts of,&rsquo; i.e. purely, or saintly in the sense of kindly, lovingly, benevolently, in a friendly manner, with sympathy, but not, as J. seems to suggest, intellectually correct. We may expand the rendering into &lsquo;with a holy mind, with thoughts of saintliness, thinking saintly thoughts.&rsquo; Compare J.&apos;s colloquial phrase quoted above. So, as to the interpretation of the line in which the compound occurs, we take it that it means to enjoin, in contrast with the previous line in which it is said that beings in general must be thought of with kindness, that religious people (instead of the mere laymen) must be thought of in a still better, higher manner, namely with holiness and saintliness.

<p>One of my informants was first inclined to take <BO>dag snang sbyong ba </BO> as &lsquo;to teach, to preach the true knowledge.&rsquo; Though he later on sided with the explanation adopted above, the opinion should be recorded, but it should be added that a second informant rejected this view of the first one.

<p>Attention should be drawn to the meaning of <BO>snang dag </BO>, &lsquo;the soul&rsquo; (with spellings <BO>snang </BO> and <BO>nang </BO>; <BO>dag </BO>, <BO>rtags </BO>, <BO>brtag </BO>, <BO>stag </BO>, s. J.). Also the curious expression &lsquo;to be indifferent&rsquo; <BO>snang dag ma btang ba </BO>, S. Ch. D.; and <BO>snang dag mi byed pa </BO>, Bell. These expressions not in Desg.

<pb id=pb47 n=47 facs="f:055"><p><BO>dag snang sbyong ba </BO> see <BO>dag snang </BO>.

<p><BO>dang po </BO> see <BO>dpe </BO>.

<p><BO>dwangs mar </BO>, 27. Adverb: &lsquo;purely, first class, first rate.&rsquo; Not in J. but in Desg., yet here in a slightly different application. About S. Ch. D.&apos;s &lsquo;gravy&rsquo; and &lsquo;relish&rsquo; see below. <BO>dwangs ma </BO> with the genitive seems to mean &lsquo;acme&rsquo;, &lsquo;essence&rsquo;, the typical embodiment of something, like in expressions as &lsquo;a first class liar, a thief pure and simple, the very devil, satan himself, nothing short of an angel, a saint in <foreign lang=la>propria persona</foreign>.&rsquo; <BO>dgra bo'i dwangs ma </BO>, &lsquo;the very enemy.&rsquo; In the colloquial <BO>dwangs ma </BO>, <BO>yang rtse </BO> and <BO>ang gi dang po </BO> may have the same meaning. The latter is something like pidgin-English &lsquo;number one&rsquo; or the kitchen Malay equivalent &lsquo;<foreign lang=ms>nommer satu</foreign>.&rsquo; Other equations are <BO>gcig po </BO> (or <BO>pu </BO>), also <BO>rang </BO>, the Anglo-Indian &lsquo;pukka.&rsquo;

<p>The word <BO>dwangs </BO> may mean soup or gravy in the following case, when there is question of singling out the liquid portion from a mixture of broth and liquid. The primary meaning seems in that case rather to be liquid as contrasted to solid. <BO>nga la dwangs blugs rogs gnang </BO> = give me (only) the liquid (not the solid stuff), pour out to me (only) the liquid. But this <BO>dwangs </BO> has no final <BO>ma </BO>. A common word for soup which is not in the Dicts. is &lsquo;rü thang&rsquo;, probably <BO>rus thang </BO>, or <BO>thang </BO> alone. This latter word is in J. with the meaning of &lsquo;potion&rsquo;, a medical term, and in S. Ch. D. as &lsquo;potion, plain decoction, or mixture to be drunk after a medicinal pill has been taken.&rsquo; The word <BO>rus thang </BO> means originally bone-soup, but has acquired also the more general meaning &lsquo;soup.&rsquo; <BO>thang </BO> can be applied to meat-soup, <BO>sha khu </BO>, but <BO>sha thang </BO> cannot be used. It might be that <BO>thang </BO> and <BO>dwangs </BO> are really the same word.

<pb id=pb48 n=48 facs="f:056"><p><BO>dad pa skyes </BO> see <BO>skye ba </BO>.

<p><BO>dam po </BO>, 30. Might here, in connection with ambition, be translated as &lsquo;fierce,&rsquo; an extension of its primary meaning &lsquo;strong.&rsquo;

<p><BO>dug po </BO> see <BO>skyo ba </BO>.

<p><BO>dug log </BO> see <BO>skyo ba </BO>.

<p><BO>dugs po </BO> see <BO>skyo ba </BO>.

<p><BO>dus nam yang </BO>, 24. For ever, always.

<p><BO>dus myur ba </BO> see <BO>myur </BO>.

<p><BO>don chung chung </BO> see <BO>don re chung </BO>.

<p><BO>don re chung </BO>, 40. &lsquo;Exceedingly stupid, meaningless, useless, silly, senseless.&rsquo; The particle <BO>re </BO> has an emphatic value, but it is difficult to define its precise scope in English. Oral information is vague on the subject, and seems to point towards a possibility that the <BO>re </BO> is a syllable of exclamation or turns the expression, of which it forms part, into an exclamation. <BO>don re chung </BO>. &lsquo;Oh, how silly!<corr sic=.></corr>&rsquo; An equivalent is <BO>don chung chung yin </BO> = <BO>don med </BO>. <BO>don chung </BO> alone is not used, and <BO>don chung chung </BO> demands a final <BO>red </BO> or <BO>yin </BO>.

<p>S. Ch. D. (502<hi>a</hi>) translates <BO>khyod bod rnams snying re rje </BO> as: &lsquo;I pity you, ye Tibetans&rsquo;; perhaps better &lsquo;What a pity, O ye Tibetans.&rsquo; Compare the list of words with wedged-in <BO>re </BO> in J. s.v. <BO>re </BO> p. 533<hi>b</hi>.

<p><BO>drin che ba </BO>, 16. Also <BO>drin chen </BO>, adjective &lsquo;kind.&rsquo; According to S. Ch. D. also &lsquo;very kind, great boon, and the great or greatest benefactor.&rsquo; S. Ch. D.&apos;s wording is unsatisfactorily indefinite and his examples, taken from J., fit the text badly. <pb id=pb49 n=49 facs="f:057">J. does not define the combination <BO>drin che ba </BO> though he has an example <BO>bka' drin che ba </BO> with the meaning &lsquo;greatest benefit.&rsquo; Two colloquial examples are: <BO>drin che ba'i yab yum gnyis </BO>, &lsquo;the two (very) kind parents,&rsquo; and <BO>mi 'di drin chen yin </BO>, that man is (very) kind.

<p>In form <BO>drin che ba </BO> is a comparative, &lsquo;kinder.&rsquo; <BO>chen po </BO> is one of those adjectives which have a comparative and superlative of their own as:


<table id=tbl.49>
<row role=label>
    <cell>
    <cell>Great.
    <cell>Many.
    <cell>Good.
    <cell>Small.
    <cell>Bad.
<row>
    <cell>positive
    <cell><BO>chen po </BO>
    <cell><BO>mang po </BO>
    <cell><BO>yag po </BO>
    <cell><BO>chung chung </BO>
    <cell><BO>sdug po </BO>
<row>
    <cell>comparative
    <cell><BO>che ba </BO>
    <cell><BO>mang ba </BO> (or <BO>nga </BO>)
    <cell><BO>yag ga </BO>
    <cell><BO>chung nga </BO>
    <cell><BO>sdug ga </BO>
<row>
    <cell>superlative
    <cell><BO>che shos </BO>
    <cell><BO>mang shos </BO>
    <cell><BO>yag shos </BO>
    <cell><BO>chung shos </BO>
    <cell><BO>sdug shos </BO>
</table>


<p>In practice, however, as shown by the above examples, the form is used for an ordinary quality in the positive degree though implying an amount of abundance or fullness of the quality referred to. Bell (p. 33) and Hannah (p. 129) have described these degrees of comparison. Short and partial notes in S. Ch. D.&apos;s grammar (p. 31) and Henderson (p. 23). See J. Dict. s.v. <BO>shos </BO>, p. 564. <BO>drin che</BO>, J. 262<hi>b</hi> (as equal to <BO>drin can </BO>) is not acknowledged by my informants.

<p><BO>drin che </BO> is objected to by my teachers because they say it never occurs alone but requires a final <BO>ba </BO>, except in the superlative form <BO>drin che shos </BO> which, of course, is another thing. See, however, S. Ch. D. <BO>bka' drin che </BO>, p. 654, J. p. 13. As to the <BO>chen </BO> or <BO>chen po </BO> in many Tibetan adjectives, this is better regarded as an enclitic particle, exactly corresponding to the English termination -ful. As little as the English -ful really <pb id=pb50 n=50 facs="f:058">means &lsquo;full&rsquo;, does the Tibetan <BO>chen </BO> (<BO>po </BO>) as a termination of adjectives really mean &lsquo;great.&rsquo;

<p>Bell has <BO>drin chen po </BO> for &lsquo;kind.&rsquo;

<p>The word <BO>drin lan </BO> and its uses merit a separate inquiry. In this place we shall limit ourselves to stating that the entry gratitude (S. Ch. D., Ramsay, Schroeter) seems incorrect. The confusion has most likely come about because a <BO>drin lan </BO> is an answer to kindness (return gift, etc.) and so <hi>betokens</hi> gratitude.

<p><BO>drin chen </BO> (<BO>po </BO>) see <BO>drin che ba </BO>.

<p><BO>drin ji bzhin </BO>, 21. Ellipse for: according to (or, in the measure of) whatever kindness (you have shown to me).

<p><BO>drin lan </BO> see <BO>drin che ba </BO>.

<p><BO>drung 'khor </BO> see <BO>brtse </BO>.

<p><BO>gdan </BO> see <BO>byang chub snying po </BO>.

<p><BO>gdug pa </BO>, 35. The three Dicts. are not at one as to the exact shades of meaning of <BO>gdug pa </BO>.

<p>J. has, subst.: &lsquo;anything hurtful, or any injury, mischief, harm, done.&rsquo;

<p>Desg., subst.: &lsquo;<foreign lang=fr>dommage, perte, mal</foreign>.&rsquo;

<p>S. Ch. D. no substantive.

<p>J., adj. (= <BO>gdug pa can</BO><corr><BO>*</BO></corr>), &lsquo;noxious, mischievous, dangerous.&rsquo; Desg., adj. only <BO>gdug pa can </BO>, not <BO>gdug pa </BO> alone: nuisible (noxious), and a <BO>gdug </BO> = <BO>gdog </BO>, deteriorated.

<p>S. Ch. D., adj.: <BO>gdug po </BO>, vicious, mischievous, deleterious, poisonous.

<p>In J. and S. Ch. D<corr>.</corr> further applied meanings as: wild, hideous (screams); ferocity (in beasts), deleterious (smell), fierce (woman).

<pb id=pb51 n=51 facs="f:059"><p>In our passage the expression <BO>gdug sems can </BO> may be rendered by malign, wicked, evil, evil-minded, spiteful, with sufficient correctness.

<p><BO>gdug pa can </BO> see <BO>gdug pa </BO>.

<p><BO>gdug po </BO> see <BO>gdug pa </BO>.

<p><BO>gdug sems can </BO> see <BO>gdug pa </BO>.

<p><BO>gdung ba </BO> see <BO>gdung dbyangs </BO>.

<p><BO>gdung dbyangs </BO>, Colophon. J. renders this word as &lsquo;a song expressive of longing or of grief, an elegy (Mil.)&rsquo;; but this definition is not quite typical of our present poem. S. Ch. D. has &lsquo;a song of longing grief.&rsquo; J.&apos;s example <BO>mos gus gdung ba dpag med skye </BO>, where <BO>gdung ba </BO> means (spiritual) love, seems to point out to a meaning more apposite here. So we would prefer a translation: paean, hymn of praise (D. <foreign lang=nl>lofzang</foreign>), or psalm instead of elegy. Other words to be considered: song of thanksgiving, memorial song, lament, plaintive song (<foreign lang=nl>jammerklacht</foreign>?), memorial verses, an <hi lang=la>in memoriam</hi>, a memorial, etc. See also <BO>dbyangs </BO>.

<p>The dge rgan, however, explains the word indeed in J.&apos;s manner, but states that the longing and grief are not the worldly sentiments but religious ones. The longing and grief are concerned with the sorrows of the world and a yearning after spiritual realities, but not with the memory of the three teachers mentioned in the poem. If this is true, the above hypothesis is likely to be a wrong one and in my translation of the colophon the words there used should in that case rather run &lsquo;as a song of yearning for the higher life&rsquo; (<hi>cf.</hi> the G. &lsquo;<foreign lang=de>Weltschmerz</foreign>&rsquo;).

<p><BO>gdog </BO> see <BO>gdug pa </BO>.

<p><BO>'dul thabs </BO>, 37. Steps, measures, to subdue or tame, etc. <BO>'dul thabs byed pa </BO>, to take such measures.

<pb id=pb52 n=52 facs="f:060"><p><BO>'dogs pa </BO> see <BO>rgyan pa </BO>.

<p><BO>'dren pa</BO>, 20. (Fut. <BO>drang </BO>). If the <BO>lcags kyu </BO> (see <BO>kyu </BO>) is here to be thought of as a goad (like the one of the mahout) then the verb should be understood as sub J. 2, &lsquo;to conduct, lead, guide&rsquo; (by prodding). My teachers take it as &lsquo;to draw,&rsquo; or &lsquo;pull.&rsquo; Pictorial representations might decide the point. My teachers think rather of a rod with a hook at the end, like the episcopal staff, and not of angling with a fishhook or prodding with a goad.

<p><BO>sdug yus </BO>, 33. Or simply <BO>yus </BO>, here: &lsquo;the loss of temper, wrath, angry explosion or outburst.&rsquo; This sense is not given in the Dicts., though J.&apos;s 4, &lsquo;ardour, fervour, transport&rsquo; comes near it. <BO>sdug yus </BO> is the same as <BO>yus </BO>, but for the fact that the former word shows the cause, an outburst on account of trouble, vexation, worry, pain, sorrow. (<BO>sdug </BO>) <BO>yus bshad </BO> (<BO>ston </BO> or <BO>byed </BO>) <BO>pa </BO> = to show (or to lose) one&apos;s temper, to flare up, to burst out, to break loose, to explode in anger, wrath. <BO>pha ma la sdug yus ma bshad </BO>, &lsquo;don&apos;t show temper to your parents.&rsquo; <BO>dpon la yus ma bshad </BO>, &lsquo;don&apos;t lose your temper before (or with) the master.&rsquo; <BO>de ring khos nga la yus mang po bstan song </BO>, &lsquo;to-day he has entirely lost his temper before (or to) me.&rsquo; It is synonymous, in this sense, with the word <BO>'u thug </BO> which is also dealt with inadequately in the Dicts. q.v. <BO>mi su la yang 'u thug ma ston </BO>, &lsquo;don&apos;t lose your temper to anyone, to whomsoever.&rsquo; <BO>khyod kyis 'u thug bshad dgos pa'i don med </BO>, &lsquo;there is no reason (no need, or it is senseless) to lose your temper.&rsquo; (<hi>Cf.</hi> D. <foreign lang=nl>uitvallen, uitvaren, uitvoeteren, opstuiven, uitbarsten.</foreign>)

<p><BO>gnam la snyeg 'dra ba </BO>, 2. Either &lsquo;as if rising towards the <pb id=pb53 n=53 facs="f:061">sky,&rsquo; in which case <BO>'dra ba </BO> refers to all the previous words, or: as if rising <hi>whilst</hi> in the sky, in which case the <BO>'dra ba </BO> would only refer to <BO>snyeg pa </BO>.

<p><BO>gnas pa </BO> see <BO>blo gzu bo </BO>.

<p><BO>mno bsam </BO> see <BO>rtog dpyod </BO>.

<p><BO>rnal 'byor sogs </BO>, 9. I have not received an explanation of the &lsquo;etc.&rsquo; (<BO>sogs </BO>) in this place and I ignore what kind of category is alluded to here. It seems not probable that the &apos;18 classes of science&rsquo; can be meant, which, in the Mah&amacr;vyutpatti (Ed. M.A.S.B.), form group XXIV, p. 20. Group L, (p. 59), furnishes more likely material, but Yoga is missing in it.

<p><BO>snang dag </BO> see <BO>dag snang </BO>.

<p><BO>dpal ldan </BO>, 56. &lsquo;Glorious, noble,&rsquo; also &lsquo;having abundance.&rsquo; Twice mentioned in J.&apos;s article but not translated, perhaps because the meaning is so evident. Curious that neither Desg. nor J. specially cite this compound to which S. Ch. D. gives 7 lines, besides mentioning several combinations.

<p><BO>dpal bla med </BO>, 52. Is this one word?

<p><BO>dpal 'bar ba </BO>, 53. &lsquo;Glory- or splendour-burning,&rsquo; i.e. &lsquo;to blaze with glory,&rsquo; or, more tamely, &lsquo;to be famous, renowned, celebrated&rsquo;; the latter quoted by J. from Cs. s.v. <BO>'bar ba </BO> (It may also be taken as glory-spreading, i.e. getting more famous). Desg. quotes a geographical name <BO>dpal 'bar </BO>, Chinese Pienpa. The expression is not in Desg. or S. Ch. D., and in J. only as taken from Cs., so that the latter&apos;s explanation needs verification. The literal translation &lsquo;to blaze with glory&rsquo; fits here better.

<p>Colloquially <BO>'bar ba </BO> is &lsquo;to thrive, to prosper, to do well.&rsquo; <BO>'bar 'dug </BO>, &lsquo;he is doing well, is well-to-do, thriving.&rsquo; <BO>'bar </BO><pb id=pb54 n=54 facs="f:062"><BO>song </BO>, he has become rich, has made a success of his life, has come out top dog, has made good, has become wealthy, opulent, is safe, got his ship home, has &lsquo;got there,&rsquo; made his pile, is now a man of position. (Fr. <foreign lang=fr>est arrivé</foreign>. D. <foreign lang=nl>is binnen, heeft zijn schaapjes op het drooge</foreign>.)

<p><BO>dpe </BO>, 53. Here <BO>dpe </BO> = <BO>dpe byad </BO> or <BO>dpe byad bzang po </BO>, technically &lsquo;the eighty symmetrical parts, proportions, or points of beauty<corr>&rsquo;</corr> (Cs., Mah&amacr;vyutpatti); or beauties, lesser signs (de Harlez); proportions (Schiefner). See the references under <BO>mtshan </BO> and <BO>mtshan dpe </BO>. J. (s.v. <BO>dpe</BO><corr><BO>*</BO></corr>, p<corr>.</corr> 327<hi>b</hi>) gives the full expression &lsquo;the eighty physical perfections of Buddha,&rsquo; <BO>dpe byad bzang po brgyad cu </BO>, and <BO>dpe byad </BO> alone &lsquo;proportion, symmetry, beauty.&rsquo; J. has the entry <BO>dpe </BO> &lsquo;symmetry, harmony, beauty (in certain phrases)&rsquo; but S. Ch. D. omits this. Our passage is an example of this use, but the syllable <BO>dpe </BO> is really an abbreviation here and not a full and independent word. Desg. seems to be mistaken in saying: <BO>dpe byed </BO> (<hi>sic</hi>, misprint for <BO>byad </BO>) or <BO>mtshan dpe </BO>, &lsquo;proportion, symmetry, the 80 marvels of the body of the Buddha.&rsquo; So <BO>dpe byad can </BO> means indeed &lsquo;symmetrical, showing 80 marvels,&rsquo; but these meanings would not be applicable to <BO>mtshan dpe can </BO> which could only mean &lsquo;showing the 32 signs and 80 beauties.&rsquo;

<p>For the rest Desg.&apos;s 2nd article s.v. <BO>dpe </BO> adds to J.&apos;s data, and his <BO>dpe srol </BO> and <BO>dpe tshul </BO> &lsquo;custom, rule, example&rsquo; are new. In Desg. &lsquo;custom, rule&rsquo; tally with S. Ch. D. &lsquo;way of doing, method&rsquo; which J. has as &lsquo;pattern, model,&rsquo; but which he translates more freely in his examples. J. s.v. <BO>byad </BO> &lsquo;proportion, symmetry, beauty,&rsquo; quotes a <BO>dpe byad </BO> from the Dzl. in the same <pb id=pb55 n=55 facs="f:063">sense. According to this <BO>dpe </BO> would be equal to <BO>byad </BO> which seems improbable and is denied by my informants. An example of the use of <BO>dpe tshul </BO> is the following: <BO>de ring sang gi dgon pa'i lo gsar gyi 'cham de dang po'i dpe tshul red </BO>, the new year&apos;s dance of now-a-days in the monastery is in imitation of the old way, is after the ancient pattern, the old manner, follows the old example. <BO>dpe tshul </BO> is here not exactly <BO>lugs srol </BO> &lsquo;custom&rsquo; but rather: &lsquo;(with) the (ancient) method (as) an example.&rsquo;

<p>Note the use of <BO>dang po'i </BO> in the above example as &lsquo;old, ancient.&rsquo;

<p><BO>dpe 'dra po </BO> see <BO>sgo </BO>.

<p><BO>dpe byad </BO> see <BO>dpe </BO>.

<p><BO>dpe byed </BO> (= <BO>byad </BO>) see <BO>dpe </BO>.

<p><BO>dpe tshul </BO> see <BO>dpe </BO>.

<p><BO>dpe srol </BO> see <BO>dpe </BO>.

<p><BO>spri na dkar po </BO>, 2, 5. The white cloud is a figure often occurring in Tibetan poetry. If used as an emblem of holiness or spiritual loftiness in connection with eminent persons, this expression may perhaps contain a stereotyped allusion to the name of the tenth and supreme bh&umacr;mi or stage of the Bodhisattva, the dharma-megha, &lsquo;cloud of virtue,&rsquo; <BO>chos kyi sprin </BO>. See Mah&amacr;vyutpatti, ed. A.S.B., p. 11. Here evidently not J.&apos;s (336<hi>a</hi>) &lsquo;emblem of transitoriness,&rsquo; though the point might be argued on the basis of the final remark s.v. <BO>gdung byangs </BO>, see above.

<p><BO>spros bral </BO>, 51. This word corresponds according to S. Ch. D. to a Sk. <corr sic="nishprapa&ndota;ca">nishprapañca</corr> (or <corr sic="apa&ndota;ca">apañca</corr>, <corr sic="aprapa&ndota;ca">aprapañca</corr>) which in Macdonell&apos;s Sk. Dict. is rendered by &lsquo;unevolved, exempt from <pb id=pb56 n=56 facs="f:064">multiformity.&rsquo; We may, therefore, think of expressions like &lsquo;the undifferentiated, homogeneous, absolute.&rsquo; The word dh&amacr;tu being the Sk. equivalent for Tib. <BO>dbyings </BO> the whole expression <BO>dbyings spros bral </BO> must correspond to a Sk. <corr sic="aprapa&ndota;ca">aprapañca</corr> dh&amacr;tu. The same Sk. Dict. translates the word dh&amacr;tu as &lsquo;layer, component part, element.&rsquo; In Tibetan <BO>dbyings </BO> means, according to J.: (1) &lsquo;the heavens&rsquo;; (2) &lsquo;height&rsquo;; (3) &lsquo;extent, region, space, in metaphysics an undefined idea.&rsquo; According to the etymology <BO>spros bral </BO> should mean &lsquo;passive, actionless, quietistic, inert,&rsquo; but according to the etymology of its Sk. prototype rather &lsquo;undifferentiated, monadic.&rsquo; One of my informants compares it with <BO>chos kyi dbyangs </BO>, dharma dh&amacr;tu, and <BO>stong pa nyid </BO>, shunyat&amacr;, the void, the absolute. In this connection one should compare J.&apos;s statements (215<hi>a</hi>) that in modern (Tibetan) Buddhism the term <BO>mngon par rtogs pa </BO> (<SA>abhisamaya</SA>), &lsquo;clear understanding or perception&rsquo; means the same as <BO>stong pa nyid </BO>, and further (259<hi>b</hi>) that <BO>don dam </BO>, originally <SA>paramaartha</SA>, has, in later times, also become equivalent to <BO>stong pa nyid </BO>. It seems that the old metaphysicians reached regions and distinctions where their followers could no longer join them, and hence the process became &lsquo;<foreign lang=la>omne ignotum pro</foreign> <BO>stong pa nyid </BO>.&rsquo; For practical purposes the rendering &lsquo;absolute,&rsquo; or &lsquo;motionless&rsquo; might be used for <BO>spros bral </BO>, whilst the word <BO>dbyings </BO> might be rendered by &lsquo;principle, state, region.&rsquo; If occurring in a specimen of the more technically and theoretically philosophical literature of Northern Buddhism, a more precise rendering and more careful definition might be required. Taking the following <BO>rtogs pa </BO> as &lsquo;knowledge, perception, cognition,&rsquo; then the whole expression becomes in English &lsquo;the knowledge of the motionless state (or <pb id=pb57 n=57 facs="f:065">region, or principle)&rsquo; or&mdash;more pedantic but perhaps truer&mdash;&lsquo;the knowledge of (that is: pertaining to, inherent in) the monadic state.&rsquo; Other equivalents: &lsquo;a state of stillness, the still state&rsquo; and, mystically, &lsquo;the wisdom of the silence.&rsquo;

<p>One of my informants, the dge rgan, knows of a colloquial use of <BO>spros bral </BO> = <BO>re ba med </BO> = &lsquo;hopeless,&rsquo; but my second authority ignores this use. The following two examples were given: <BO>'di shes pa spros bral red </BO>, &lsquo;it is labour lost (hopeless) to [try and] know this.&rsquo; You cannot hope to know this. (<hi><abbr expan="Nota Bene">N.B.</abbr></hi>&mdash;Note the elliptic construction &lsquo;hopeless to know&rsquo; for &lsquo;to try to know, to study and so come to know.&rsquo;) <BO>yi ge yag po klog shes kyi mi 'dug sum rtags shes pa spros bral red </BO>, &lsquo;As he does not even know how to read well (or properly), it is hopeless (lost labour), for him to (or: how can he?) study grammar<corr sic="?">&rsquo;</corr> (Not: how can he pretend to <hi>know</hi> grammar?).

<p><hi>N.B.</hi>&mdash;The Tibetan does not &lsquo;read&rsquo; but &lsquo;reads books&rsquo;; he does not &lsquo;write&rsquo; but &lsquo;writes letters,&rsquo; he does not &lsquo;go&rsquo; but &lsquo;goes to the shop.&rsquo; In short, he is a very objective being.

<p><BO>pha </BO><corr>,</corr> 8. &lsquo;Father.&rsquo; It is not clear why in the same line the same person is referred to by the ordinary <BO>pha </BO> and then by the honorific <BO>yab </BO>, unless <BO>yab sras </BO> is a standard expression which cannot be changed whilst the first <BO>pha </BO> is used for the sake of variety in expression.

<p>The same double use of the honorific and ordinary terms for father occurs in Laufer&apos;s &lsquo;<foreign lang=de>Ein Sühngedicht der Bonpo</foreign>&rsquo;, line 41.

<p><BO>phyogs </BO>, 5. In expressions like <BO>lding ba'i shar phyogs na </BO> the <BO>ba'i </BO> is explained as equivalent to <BO>sa'i </BO>, &lsquo;of the place where.&rsquo; So the phrase <BO>mi de 'gro ba'i phyogs 'di la </BO> should be understood as &lsquo;towards where the man has gone, to the place where the man has gone,&rsquo; <BO>'gro sa'i phyogs 'di la </BO>.

<pb id=pb58 n=58 facs="f:066"><p><BO>phyogs pa </BO>, 14. Here verb, infinitive, connected with Gendundub in instrumental (agentive) or genitival relation: to turn, move towards, to tend to.

<p><BO>phyogs su lhung ba </BO>, 46. Lit. &lsquo;to fall aside,&rsquo; but here, as applied to the mind (<BO>yid </BO>), simply to be deflected, to go astray, to fall, sin (mentally), to deviate from the right path (religion, the right), to lapse (from virtue), etc.

<p><BO>'phung bar 'dod pa </BO>, 29. &lsquo;To wish the ruin, the undoing, destruction<corr sic=","></corr> of, to be bent on the perdition of, to wish evil to&rsquo; = <BO>med par 'dod pa </BO>.

<p><BO>byang chub snying po </BO>, 17. The bodhima&ndotb;&ddotb;a, according to the Dicts. historically and geographically Gaya, where the Buddha attained nirv&amacr;&ndotb;a. Here, however, it means rather the state implied by the locality, &lsquo;illumination, the essence of purification, final sainthood&rsquo; literally &lsquo;the quintessence of bodhi.&rsquo; In Christian language Golgotha (or the Cross) is similarly used in a metaphorical sense. In living Tibetan <BO>byang chub </BO> (bodhi) is not understood as &lsquo;wisdom&rsquo; but as &lsquo;saintliness, purity.&rsquo; There is, it seems, a confusion in the group of Tibetan [and Chinese!] renderings of bodhima&ndotb;&ddotb;a (bodhi-essence) and bodhi-ma&ndotb;&ddotb;ala (bodhi-round), and their synonyms, a confusion which may already have its origin in India itself. The treatment of these words in the Dicts. is not satisfactory. J. and S. Ch. D. give s.v. <BO>byang chub snying po </BO> this word as synonymous with <BO>rdo rje gdan </BO>, Vajr&amacr;sana, but under <BO>snying po </BO> S. Ch. D. has the entry: <corr>&lsquo;</corr><BO>byang chub snying po </BO>, the spirit of the Bodhisattva, i.e. Buddhahood.&rsquo; This is the sense meant in our passage, though it may be doubted whether <BO>byang chub </BO> really stands here for <BO>byang chub sems dpa' </BO> as S. Ch. D. interprets it instead of only for bodhi. The Mah&amacr;vyutpatti (A.S.B., p. 44) has Bodhima&ndotb;&ddotb;a = <BO>byang chub snying po </BO>, and Cs. translates, &lsquo;the essence of sanctity <pb id=pb59 n=59 facs="f:067">or holiness (name of the holy place at Gaya).&rsquo; I yet believe that here a confusion of ma&ndotb;&ddotb;a and ma&ndotb;&ddotb;ala must be thought of. J. has, s.v. <BO>snying po </BO> (p. 198<hi>b</hi>) &lsquo;snyi&ndota;-po-bya&ndota; &cgrave;&mlrcomma;úb- (or bya&ndota;-&cgrave;&mlrcomma;ub-snyi&ndota;-po)-la m&cgrave;&mlrcomma;ís-pa, to become Buddha <hi>Thgy.</hi>&rsquo; Rockhill, Life of the Buddha, p. 35, mentions the form byang-tchub-kyi-snying-po as the equivalent for bodhima&ndotb;&ddotb;a, and though Foucaux in the alphabetical index to his translation of the Lalita Vist&amacr;ra gives only the form without <BO>kyi </BO>, yet in his text, in the places I verified (p. 239, five times), there is the <BO>kyi </BO> as with Rockhill.

<p>In mentioning the word <BO>rdo rje gdan </BO> a special reference must be made to the element <BO>gdan </BO>, commonly translated as bolster, cushion, seat, rug, etc. J. is very detailed about it. He has: &lsquo;a bolster, or seat composed of several quilts or cushions, put one upon the other (five for common people, nine for people of quality).&rsquo; Desg. simply &lsquo;stuffed cushion.&rsquo; S. Ch. D. more general &lsquo;a low seat, a divan, cushion, a bolster.&rsquo; As to J.&apos;s definition my authorities declare that this may be so perhaps &lsquo;on the Ladakh side,&rsquo; but is certainly not so in Tibet and in the Darjeeling district. They do not know about the details of five and nine cushions. They take the meaning far wider than bolster or cushion. They say that anything used to support anything or to seat anybody may be called <BO>gdan </BO>, it may be a sheet of cloth, a carpet, a blanket, a cushion, a bolster, a seat in general, anything used for lying or sitting down on. The word has a meaning exactly opposite to the English &lsquo;cover&rsquo; and can consequently be used in as many varied senses as the latter. Etymologically&mdash;if the root of <BO>gdan </BO>, as seems probable, means &lsquo;to support&rsquo;&mdash;the word would mean something like &lsquo;bearer,&rsquo; &lsquo;basis,&rsquo; &lsquo;bed,&rsquo; &lsquo;floor,&rsquo; &lsquo;upholder.&rsquo; We might think of &lsquo;underwear<corr sic="&rsquo;,">,&rsquo;</corr> though in English that particular word is used with quite another association of ideas. In typography there is a word &lsquo;underlay&rsquo; which corresponds exactly to the meaning of <BO>gdan </BO>. The word &lsquo;bedplate&rsquo;, used in engineering, comes also near to it. It will be easily seen how an applied meaning as &lsquo;cushion, bolster,&rsquo; if given as the general sense of the word, would in many cases be totally inadequate. The line of associations to which &lsquo;cushion&rsquo; belongs, and the line of associations to which &lsquo;seat, support, underlay&rsquo; belong, intersect at only one <pb id=pb60 n=60 facs="f:068">point and for the rest have nothing in common. A table-cloth may be called <BO>gdan </BO> because the food rests on it (<BO>lto gdan </BO> is used in this sense; lit. something like &lsquo;food-sheet, that on which the food rests&rsquo;). In a ritual it is prescribed that the <BO>gdan </BO> for the offerings should be a spotless piece of white cotton or other cloth, called <BO>mchod gdan </BO>, &lsquo;offering sheet,&rsquo; &lsquo;that on which the offerings rest<corr>.</corr>&rsquo; Bell has <BO>sa gdan </BO> for &lsquo;carpet&rsquo;; small cushion, placed on chair <BO>kha gdan </BO>; large cushion on ground <BO>'bol gdan </BO>. This is a most interesting example illustrating the fact that it is strictly necessary first to find out the root-idea of a Tibetan word before translating it by words representing the incidental applications of that root-idea. Whoever has handled Chinese dictionaries knows how specially necessary this is in studying Indo-Chinese languages. The Sanskrit equivalent, &amacr;sana, is derived from the root &amacr;s, to sit or lie, but the Tib. root seems different.

<p>Further notes on <BO>gdan </BO>. <hi>Cf.</hi> J. <BO>ma gdan </BO> (pr. magdàn), ground, basis, foundation, p. 409<hi>a</hi>. Bell, apron <BO>pang gdan </BO><corr>.</corr> Cs., Grammar, p. 170, l. 10, translates <BO>gdan </BO> as couch (stuffed seat). Lewin, Manual, p. 123, first word last line: &lsquo;mat, seat&rsquo;, in the same sentence taken over from Cs.&rsquo;s Grammar. Two synonyms for J.&apos;s <BO>ma gdan </BO>, quoted above, are <BO>rmang gdan </BO> and <BO>gzhi gdan </BO>. Bell also has &lsquo;mat.&rsquo;

<p><BO>byams snying rje </BO>, 50. Seems simply an amplified form for &lsquo;love.&rsquo; Difficult to be translated exactly, Sk. maitr&imacr;karu&ndotb;&amacr;, may be treated as a compound, loving-kindness, love and kindness, or pity. On the question of karu&ndotb;&amacr;, especially, the learned have descanted profusely.

<p><BO>bla </BO> (<BO>na </BO>) <BO>med </BO> (<BO>pa </BO>), 52. Sk. <SA>anuttara</SA>, unsurpassed, unexcelled, unrivalled, supreme, incomparable, most high, highest. Not specially entered in J. but illustrated by an example s.v. <BO>bla </BO>. <pb id=pb61 n=61 facs="f:069">Altogether absent in Desg. S. Ch. D. <BO>bla med rnams la </BO>, &lsquo;to those who are supreme, or to the followers of the Anuttara school.&rsquo; A curious entry! See S. Ch. D. also s.v. <BO>bla na </BO>.

<p><BO>bla ma </BO>, 3. Here perhaps better &lsquo;teacher&rsquo; than &lsquo;priest&rsquo; or &lsquo;superior.&rsquo; The word may be here equally well taken in the singular as in the plural, but the latter is perhaps more likely.

<p><BO>bla med </BO>, see <BO>bla na med pa </BO>.

<p><BO>blo gzu bo </BO><corr>,</corr> 47. &lsquo;Straight, upright, righteous mind.&rsquo; J.&apos;s entry is a little vague. I think he takes <BO>thugs </BO> in his example <BO>thugs gzu bo </BO> as an indication that <BO>gzu bo </BO> is also a honorific form. That, however, is not the case. Compare also the quotation from Cs. in S. Ch. D., <BO>gzu bor gnas pa </BO> &lsquo;to be impartial and straightforward, to be on the side of honesty.&rsquo; I don&apos;t find this example in Schmidt. Desg. &lsquo;straight, upright, (<foreign lang=fr>élevé</foreign>,) just, honest.&rsquo; According to the above the word is an adj<corr>.</corr> and the translation of the passage becomes &lsquo;whether you persevere in a straight (righteous) mind.&rsquo; The verb <BO>gnas pa </BO> has then to be taken as &lsquo;to hold, adhere to, persevere in (an opinion<corr>,</corr> etc.)<corr>.</corr>&rsquo; If however, we should find that <BO>gzu bo </BO> can also be sbst. &lsquo;righteousness<corr sic="&rsquo;,">,&rsquo;</corr> &lsquo;straightness,&rsquo; (not in any Dict.), then <BO>gnas pa </BO> would have the other meaning of &lsquo;to dwell, reside&rsquo; and the phrase would have to be rendered &lsquo;whether the mind (continues to) dwell(s) in righteousness.&rsquo; S. Ch. D. renders <BO>thugs gzu bo </BO> as &lsquo;honest mind,&rsquo; but the sense honest versus dishonest seems not quite applicable in our passage. J<corr>.</corr> is vague here. My informants gave the above definition &lsquo;straight, upright&rsquo; as their own but felt afterwards vague about this example which, though they had framed it, they could not vouch for: <BO>mi de gzu bor gnas mi gnas ltos shig </BO>, &lsquo;see whether the man keeps straight or not.&rsquo; The framer honestly confessed that whilst we were discussing the word he had been influenced by S. Ch. D<corr>.&rsquo;s</corr> Dict. in coining the sentence; a <pb id=pb62 n=62 facs="f:070">confession so instructive for idiom-verifiers that I think it worth while to record it here.

<p>Finally, Desg. supports S. Ch.&rsquo;s second meaning &lsquo;witness&rsquo; for <BO>gzu bo </BO><corr>.</corr> He, however, does not <corr sic=gives>give</corr> S. Ch.&rsquo;s form <BO>gzu dpang </BO>. The ordinary word for witness is, of course, <BO>dpang </BO> (<BO>po </BO>). It is characteristic of S. Ch. D. that he copies J.&apos;s extract from Sch. under <BO>gzu dpang </BO> &lsquo;witness, mediator,&rsquo; but then immediately adds his own individual interpretation which not only is likely to be correct, but which also nullifies and contradicts the previous entry which he copied immediately above. He himself says, &lsquo;an honest and truthful witness.&rsquo; It often occurs that S. Ch. D. brings modifications, extensions and even corrections to J.&apos;s statements, but at the same time he copies J. far too slavishly and so contradicts himself in the pages of his own dictionary. Whether meanings like &lsquo;reliable, straightforward, correct, proper,&rsquo; etc., have to be attached to <BO>gzu bo </BO> is as yet uncertain.

<p><BO>blo bzang grags pa </BO>, 8. In Sk. Sumatik&imacr;rti. According to the Sk. dictionaries the primary sense of &lsquo;sumati&rsquo; is &lsquo;benevolence.&rsquo; In present-day Tibetan <BO>blo bzang </BO> is rather &lsquo;good-natured, kindhearted,&rsquo; as against <BO>drin chen po </BO> &lsquo;benevolent.&rsquo; So the Tibetan name has to be rendered as Good-nature-fame, or Famous good-nature, the personal name of Tso&ndota; k&mlrcomma;a pa.

<p><BO>dbang du </BO> (<BO>ma </BO>) <BO>song ba </BO>, 22. (Not) fallen under the power (of)....

<p><BO>dbyangs </BO>, 54 and colophon. This word seems here hardly to mean &lsquo;song, singing tune,&rsquo; but rather &lsquo;melody, melodiousness, sweetness,&rsquo; etc. This tallies to a certain extent with Csoma&apos;s translation of the title of list LXI (p. 86) of the Mah&amacr;vyutpatti, &lsquo;Names of the 60 sorts (or divisions) of melody or melodious voices (or vocal sound).&rsquo; I take it that this list refers to what is mentioned here in our text. How these 60 branches of melody are exactly to be understood I have not been able to ascertain. The opinions of P&mlrcomma;un Ts&mlrcomma;ogs on the point are as follows. The Buddha&apos;s voice had such a <pb id=pb63 n=63 facs="f:071">variety of (magic?) qualities, sixty in number, that they made him understood by all beings, whatever their own languages. The Buddha was in this way simultaneously understood by men, devas, n&amacr;gas, etc. In proffering this explanation P&mlrcomma;un Ts&mlrcomma;ogs takes <BO>yan lag </BO> to mean rather &lsquo;kind&rsquo; than &lsquo;branch.&rsquo; As an alternative he suggests that <BO>dbyangs </BO> is an adjective synonymous with <BO>ring bu</BO><corr><BO>*</BO></corr>, &lsquo;high&rsquo; (as applied to voice or rather tone) [or perhaps long, lengthened?] and that then <BO>dbyangs yan lag </BO> would mean a &lsquo;variety&rsquo; of tones or modulations. I myself am inclined to think that if the Mah&amacr;vyutpatti list is not referred to, we have here to do with some scholastic scheme of rhetorics, though if so understood the exact value of <BO>dbyangs </BO> is not clear and certainly not sufficiently defined in the Dicts.

<p>(<hi>Cf.</hi> S. Ch. D. s.v. <BO>zab </BO> (p. 1092<hi>a</hi>), <BO>zab dbyangs </BO> = <SA>mandra</SA>, <SA>mandraka</SA>, &lsquo;a deep voice, a musical tone.&rsquo; See also <BO>gdung dbyangs </BO>.<corr>)</corr>

<p><BO>dbyings </BO> see <BO>spros bral </BO>.

<p><BO>dbyings spros bral </BO> see <BO>spros bral </BO>.

<p><BO>'bar ba </BO> see <BO>dpal 'bar ba </BO>.

<p><BO>'bol gdan </BO> see <BO>byang chub snying po </BO>.

<p><BO>'brog </BO>, 6. Here &lsquo;solitude, wilderness&rsquo; and so = <BO>ri khrod </BO> = <BO>dgon pa </BO>, &lsquo;monastery.&rsquo; Not associated with any of the meanings connected with &lsquo;pasturing.&rsquo; <hi>Cf.</hi> S. Ch. D. <BO>'brog dgon </BO> s.v. <BO>'brog </BO>.

<p>The famous Galdan monastery was erected on a site called <BO>'brog po'i ri </BO>. See S. Ch. D., The Monasteries of Tibet, <abbr>J.A.S.B.</abbr>, Vol. I, <abbr expan="New Series">N.S.</abbr> (1905), p. 108.

<p><BO>mi kho </BO> see <BO>glud </BO>.

<pb id=pb64 n=64 facs="f:072"><p><BO>mi kho glud yin </BO> see <BO>glud </BO>.

<p><BO>mi glud </BO> see <BO>glud </BO>.

<p><BO>mig bzang ma </BO> see <BO>yangs </BO>.

<p><BO>mig yangs </BO> see <BO>yangs </BO>.

<p><BO>med par 'dod pa </BO> see <BO>'phung bar 'dod pa </BO>.

<p><BO>myur </BO>, 52. J. <BO>myur ba </BO> adj., and <BO>myur du </BO> adv., &lsquo;quick(ly), swift(ly).&rsquo; In Mil. adj. <BO>myur po </BO>. Desg. <BO>myur </BO> and <BO>myur ba </BO> (<BO>nyid </BO>), subst. &lsquo;promptness,&rsquo; and <BO>myur po </BO> &lsquo;swift.&rsquo; As adv. <BO>myur bar </BO>, or <BO>du </BO>, or <BO>gyis </BO>. S. Ch. D. <BO>myur ba </BO>, verb, &lsquo;to hurry by, to pass on swiftly,&rsquo; (example <BO>dus myur ba </BO>, &lsquo;time quickly runs away.&rsquo; [= <foreign lang=la>tempus fugit</foreign>]), and adv. quickly. Further adv. <BO>myur du </BO>. Some interesting compounds in S. Ch. D.: <BO>myur ma </BO> &lsquo;a dancing woman,&rsquo; etc. Note the expression <BO>ci myur </BO> &lsquo;as speedily as possible,&rsquo; J.

<p>According to my informants S. Ch. D.&apos;s example <BO>dus myur ba </BO> is not good Tibetan. It should either be <BO>dus myur po </BO> (or <BO>ba </BO>) <BO>yin </BO>, lit. &lsquo;time is quick,&rsquo; or with another meaning also &lsquo;the time is near&rsquo; (i.e. at hand, <hi>coming</hi> quickly), or again <BO>dus myur po de </BO>, &lsquo;the quick time.&rsquo; Time quickly runs away, they say, should be expressed thus: <BO>dus myur bar 'gro gi 'dug </BO>.

<p><hi>Cf.</hi> also J., Desg.: <BO>smyur ba </BO><corr>.</corr>

<p><BO>myur ma </BO> see <BO>myur </BO>.

<p><BO>tsam gyi </BO>, 38. Here: &lsquo;after only, as a result of only, in consequence <pb id=pb65 n=65 facs="f:073">of only, mere, simple.&rsquo; But <BO>tsam </BO> has also the meanings: as soon as, simply on (hearing), on the slightest (reproach, etc.) with a more prominent stress on the time element, instantaneousness.

<p><BO>rtse drung </BO> see <BO>brtse </BO>.

<p><BO>rtse po ta la </BO> see <BO>brtse </BO>.

<p><BO>rtse zhwa </BO> see <BO>brtse </BO>.

<p><BO>rtsod pa rgyab pa </BO> see <BO>gshags 'gyed pa </BO>.

<p><BO>brtse </BO>, 55. <BO>brtse </BO> = <BO>brtse ba </BO>, vb. &lsquo;to love&rsquo;  sbst. &lsquo;love, kindness, affection,&rsquo; etc. Desg. has also a <BO>brtse </BO>, &lsquo;acidity,&rsquo; which is also known to my informants. His <BO>brtse drang </BO> &lsquo;bodyguard of the Dalai Lama&rsquo; is held, by one of my informants, to be a mistake for <BO>rtse drung </BO> (pronounce ts&imacr;-dung), the monk-employees of the Tibetan government (and in a narrower sense: the clerical staff, the clerks and secretaries amongst them) as contrasted with the lay-employees of noble birth (not officials in general as with S. Ch. D. 656<hi>a</hi>, but only those belonging to the nobility) who are called <BO>drung 'khor </BO>. The word <BO>rtse </BO> in the compound is said to be derived from the designation of the Potala palace where many of the government offices are located, and which is called <BO>rtse po ta la </BO>, the Potala peak, but most commonly, by the people, briefly <BO>rtse </BO>, the peak. This explanation of ts&imacr;-dung as a general class of lama government-employees is wider than that given in Waddell&apos;s table in his &lsquo;<corr resp=errata sic=Lhassa>Lhasa</corr> and its Mysteries,&rsquo; p. 165. See also <BO>rtse drung </BO>, &lsquo;chief clerk or secretary&rsquo; in S. Ch. D. s.v. <BO>rtse zhwa </BO> (1013<hi>b</hi>), the latter being the special name of the former&apos;s hat.

<p><BO>brtse drang </BO> see <BO>brtse </BO>.

<pb id=pb66 n=66 facs="f:074"><p><BO>brtson par bgyid pa </BO>, 24. Equals <BO>brtson par byed pa </BO> (or <BO>gyur ba </BO>) &lsquo;to apply oneself, exert oneself, put one&apos;s best energy into something&rsquo; = <BO>snying rus byed pa </BO>, &lsquo;to be zealous, diligent.&rsquo; Also <BO>brtson 'grus skyed pa </BO> (<BO>byed pa </BO>, <BO>rtsom pa </BO>).

<p><BO>tshul </BO>, 28. Here &lsquo;conduct, behaviour&rsquo; pure and simple, without allusion to the <BO>tshul khrims </BO>, &lsquo;religious law, discipline, monastic rules.&rsquo;

<p><BO>tshul bzhin </BO> see <BO>chos tshul bzhin </BO>.

<p><BO>mtshan </BO>, 53. Here technically the (thirty-two) characteristic signs or marks of a &lsquo;Great Man,&rsquo; the mah&amacr;purusha. Mah&amacr;vyutpatti (Ed. A. S. B.), LXIII, p. 92. De Harlez, &lsquo;<foreign lang=fr>Vocabulaire Bouddhique Sanscrit-Chinois</foreign>,&rsquo; no. 3. Schiefner, &lsquo;Triglotte,&rsquo; no. 3. See de la Vallée Poussin, &lsquo;<foreign lang=fr>Bouddhisme</foreign>,&rsquo; pp. 241 et seq.

<p>The transition of meaning of the word <BO>mtshan </BO> in modern Tibetan in such expressions as <BO>mtshan ldan bla ma </BO>, &lsquo;a holy lama,&rsquo; or <BO>mtshan ldan ma </BO>, &lsquo;a woman of good appearance and virtues&rsquo; (S. Ch. D.) should not be overlooked in the interpretation of our passage for its psychological value. See also <BO>dpe </BO>.

<p><BO>mtshan ldan </BO> see <BO>mtshan </BO>.

<p><BO>mtshan dpe </BO>, 53. This is a compound substantive of an elliptic nature, and means: &lsquo;the [well known 32 primary] characteristics [and the 80] beauties [of Buddhas]<corr>&rsquo;</corr> = <BO>mtshan dang dpe byad </BO> (<BO>bzang po </BO>). See also <BO>mtshan </BO> and <BO>dpe </BO>.

<p><BO>mtshan 'dzin </BO>, 30. <BO>mtshan </BO> is here hon. of <BO>ming </BO> &lsquo;name,&rsquo; and the compound, literally &lsquo;name grasping,&rsquo; means &lsquo;ambition, thirst for fame, glory,&rsquo; etc. (D. <foreign lang=nl>eerzucht, roemzucht</foreign>), perhaps even &lsquo;vainglory, pride, conceit, egotism,&rsquo; i.e. the hugging of one&apos;s own name and fame.

<pb id=pb67 n=67 facs="f:075"><p><BO>mtshan brjod pa </BO>, 7. To invoke by name, to address a prayer to by name. Applied to both spiritual and human beings. <BO>rgyal po'i mtshan brjod pa </BO>, &lsquo;to address the king, speak to the king, direct, appeal to the king,&rsquo; but always by calling him by his name. &lsquo;O king help me&rsquo; is not a proper example of <BO>mtshan brjod pa </BO>, but &lsquo;O, thou, King George, help me!&rsquo; would be one. To spiritual beings their names may be expressed in a paraphrase, metaphor or symbol, but they must be expressed in some way. The prayers to superhuman beings may be twofold, either an address containing requests, etc., or a mere litany of names without any further subject matter attached to them. The one is a recitation of names, the other a direct address by name; the one a litany proper, the other an invocation or prayer.

<p><BO>'tshol ba </BO>, 19. The form <BO>mi 'tshol bas </BO> was paraphrased to me as <BO>'tshol gi min </BO> = <BO>'tshol mi yong </BO> = simple future, &lsquo;not going to seek&rsquo; (D. <foreign lang=nl>niet zullende zoeken</foreign>).

<p><BO>zhib dpyad </BO> see <BO>rtog dpyod </BO>.

<p><BO>zhe khrel ba </BO> see <BO>khrel ba </BO>.

<p><BO>zhen pa log pa </BO> see <BO>khrel ba </BO>.

<p><BO>gzhan bstan </BO> (<BO>pa </BO>) <BO>'dzin pa </BO> see <BO>rang bstan </BO> (<BO>pa </BO>) <BO>'dzin pa </BO>.

<p><BO>gzhung </BO> see <BO>khrel ba </BO>.

<p><BO>gzhung sgo </BO> see <BO>sgo </BO>.

<p><BO>gzhungs pa </BO> see <BO>khrel ba </BO>.

<p><BO>gzhes </BO> see <BO>mgur ma </BO>.

<p><BO>bzhag pa </BO> see <BO>rgyan pa </BO>.

<p><BO>zab </BO>, 10, 55. <BO>zab </BO> = <BO>zab pa </BO>. J. vb., adj., subst. and adv. &lsquo;to be deep, deep, deeply, depth&rsquo;; adj. <BO>zab po </BO> and <BO>mo </BO>. Desg. <pb id=pb68 n=68 facs="f:076"><BO>zab po </BO> and <BO>mo </BO> adj. only. S. Ch. D. <BO>zab pa </BO> vb. &lsquo;to make deep, to deepen,&rsquo; also adj. and sbst.; further in <BO>po </BO> and <BO>mo </BO> only adj. Note the additional meaning &lsquo;dense&rsquo; (also <BO>zabs </BO> &lsquo;thickness&rsquo;) in S. Ch. D., not in the two others. My teachers deny that <BO>zab pa </BO> can be a verb &lsquo;to deepen,&rsquo; or &lsquo;to make deep.&rsquo; <BO>zab </BO> must also be understood as &lsquo;profound&rsquo; (wisdom, teaching, etc.). See <BO>chos zab </BO>, also <BO>dbyangs </BO>, also <BO>thugs ni </BO>, etc.

<p><BO>zab yangs </BO> see <BO>thugs ni </BO>, etc.

<p><BO>gzu bo </BO> see <BO>blo gzu bo </BO>.

<p><BO>gzu dpang </BO> see <BO>blo gzu bo </BO>.

<p><BO>gzu bor gnas pa </BO> see <BO>blo gzu bo </BO>.

<p><BO>'u thug </BO> see <BO>sdug yus </BO>.

<p><BO>yang rtse </BO> see <BO>dwangs mar </BO>.

<p><BO>yangs </BO>, 55. = <BO>yangs pa </BO> or <BO>po </BO>, &lsquo;wide, large.&rsquo; Desg. also &lsquo;ample, abundant.&rsquo; S. Ch. D. only <BO>yangs pa </BO>. Note J. &lsquo;&ast;mig-ya&ndota;<corr sic="&rsquo;&ast;">&ast;&rsquo;</corr>, C., W. liberal, generous, bounteous,&rsquo; but Desg. <BO>mig yangs pa </BO> &lsquo;wide-eyes: envious, covetous, greedy.&rsquo; In S. Ch. D. <BO>yangs pa'i mig </BO> = <choice><sic><SA>vi"salak.sii</SA></sic><corr><SA>vi"saalaak.sii</SA></corr></choice>, &lsquo;large-eyes, a handsome woman, name of a Goddess.&rsquo; <hi>Cf.</hi> also in the same dict. <BO>mig bzang ma </BO>, &lsquo;beautiful-eyes, a very handsome woman, a nymph&apos;s name.&rsquo; As to J.&apos;s mig-ya&ndota;, one of my teachers holds with him as against Desg., the other does not know the expression.

<p><BO>yangs pa'i mig </BO> see <BO>yangs </BO>.

<p><BO>yan lag </BO> see <BO>dbyangs </BO>.

<p><BO>yab sras </BO> (<BO>gsum</BO><corr><BO>*</BO></corr>), 8, 15, 16, 18. &lsquo;Father (and) sons,&rsquo; or, as Csoma already has it in his Grammar, p. 28, &lsquo;teacher and <pb id=pb69 n=69 facs="f:077">pupils.&rsquo; With the addition <BO>gsum </BO> &lsquo;three,&rsquo; and also as here without this addition, a very well known appellation of Tso&ndota; k&mlrcomma;a pa and his two pupils (his spiritual sons). It is likely that to the Tibetan mind the expression means something like &lsquo;spiritual family (of three),&rsquo; namely of one father and two sons. See introductory remarks. Free renderings like &lsquo;spiritual trio&rsquo; or &lsquo;teacher triad&rsquo; and the like are apt enough for practical purposes. <hi>Cf<corr>.</corr></hi> an expression like the following: <BO>khyod pha bu gnyis ga nas yin </BO>, &lsquo;where have you two, father and son, come from?&rsquo; (But the sentence has also the second meaning &lsquo;where do you live? where is your home?&rsquo;).

<p>In the light of the above, has the note on p. 98 of the J.A.S.B., Vol. II, N.S., no. 4, 1906, in Satis Chandra Vidy&amacr;bh&umacr;&sdotb;ana&apos;s article on &lsquo;the Gyantse rock inscription&rsquo; to be rectified? My informants do not think that the expression is used among the Sakyapas in the sense given in that note.

<p><BO>yin na yang </BO> see <BO>kyang </BO>.

<p><BO>yus </BO> see <BO>sdug yus </BO>.

<p><BO>g.yul </BO> see <BO>'gye ba </BO>.

<p><BO>g.yul 'gyed </BO> see <BO>'gye ba </BO>.

<p><BO>rang </BO> see <BO>dwangs mar </BO>.

<p><BO>rang bstan </BO> (<BO>pa </BO>) <BO>'dzin pa </BO>, 26. This expression must here not be understood as &lsquo;to follow one&apos;s own teaching.&rsquo; <BO>rang bstan </BO> is here not one compound word. The meaning is: they who themselves follow the teaching, as against the <BO>gzhan bstan pa 'dzin pa </BO>, the others who (also) follow the teaching. See <BO>gzhan bstan </BO> (<BO>pa </BO>) <BO>'dzin pa </BO>, 27.

<p><BO>ri khrod </BO> see <BO>'brog </BO> and <BO>gangs ri'i khrod 'di na </BO>.

<p><BO>ri 'brog </BO> see <BO>'brog </BO> and <BO>gangs ri'i khrod 'di na </BO>.

<p><BO>rig pa </BO> see <BO>mkhyen brtse </BO>.

<pb id=pb70 n=70 facs="f:078"><p><BO>rig pa bsgrims nas </BO> see <BO>gol sa </BO>.

<p><BO>ring bu </BO> see <BO>dbyangs </BO>.

<p><BO>rus thang </BO> see <BO>dwangs mar </BO>.

<p><BO>re </BO> see <BO>don re chung </BO>.

<p><BO>re ba med </BO> see <BO>spros bral </BO>.

<p><BO>lan 'pham pa </BO> see <BO>gshags 'gyed pa </BO>.

<p><BO>lam gol </BO> see <BO>gol sa </BO>.

<p><BO>lam gol sa </BO> see <BO>gol sa </BO>.

<p><BO>lam mthon po </BO>, 31. &lsquo;The high, elevated road,&rsquo; has a religious connotation, the proper road that leads to heaven after death, the &lsquo;narrow&rsquo; road of Christianity. See below.

<p><BO>lam drang po </BO>, 48. The straight road (metaphorically), the road of righteousness, of straightness of mind. <hi>Cf.</hi> S. Ch. D. s.v. <BO>drang lam </BO>, p. 649<hi>a</hi>. The meaning of this expression and that of <BO>lam mthon po </BO>, in line 31 (see above), are quite different. The other is the highroad (towards heaven), the road of a high standard of moral conduct.

<p><BO>lam rim </BO>, 9. &lsquo;Steps on the path,&rsquo; &lsquo;degrees of advance,&rsquo; &lsquo;steps towards perfection,&rsquo; is the short title of many mystical writings and especially of one by Tso&ndota; k&mlrcomma;a pa, to which the words may allude here without specially designating it. In this place the meaning does not seem to be a specific work but merely &lsquo;(religious) instructions, teaching in general.&rsquo; The <BO>lam rim pa gnyis </BO> are here, according to my oral information, to be taken as the two halves or divisions of the Kandjur which is commonly divided into <BO>mdo </BO> and <BO>sngags </BO>, s&umacr;tra and tantra (or mantra, or dh&amacr;ra&ndotb;&imacr;). In this division the <BO>rgyud </BO> or tantra section is called <BO>sngags </BO>, whilst all the rest, properly subdivided <pb id=pb71 n=71 facs="f:079">in six divisions, is taken together as <BO>mdo </BO>, of which the real <BO>mdo sde </BO> or s&umacr;tra-division (the 5th in sequence in the Kandjur) is only one. Concerning Tso&ndota; k&mlrcomma;a pa&apos;s study of the &lsquo;S&umacr;tras and Tantras&rsquo; see S. Ch. D., &lsquo;Contributions, etc. on Tibet,&rsquo; VI, in J.A.S.B., 1882, Vol. LI, Part I, no. 1, p. 53. J., s.v. <BO>bstan pa </BO>, quotes a <BO>bstan pa gnyis </BO>: &lsquo;with Urgyan Padma, etc., the same as mdoi and s&ndota;ags kyi lam, v. mdo extr.&rsquo; This is seemingly the same as our expression.

<p><BO>lus can </BO>, 42. J. has = <BO>sems can </BO>, &lsquo;beings, creatures,&rsquo; but may not the idea rather be all <hi>embodied</hi> creatures; with the etymological sense still potent in connection with the Buddhist reincarnation theory?  S. Ch. D. gives a <BO>lus can gnas </BO> = <BO>grong khyer </BO> = &lsquo;town, city,&rsquo; which seems rather to point to the meaning &lsquo;man&rsquo; for <BO>lus can </BO>. My informants don&apos;t feel quite certain whether to include the five other classes of beings (including animals) amongst the <BO>lus can </BO>, but are somewhat inclined to interpret the word as <BO>mi </BO>, &lsquo;man,&rsquo; in general.

<p><BO>sha 'dzin </BO> see <BO>kyu </BO>.

<p><BO>shar gangs ri ma </BO>, title, 1. The author writes his poem in a place to the west of a snow-capped mountain, to the east of which the Galdan monastery is situated. See notes on <BO>'brog </BO>, <BO>dge ldan </BO> and <BO>gangs ri'i khrod 'di na </BO>. Which mountain or mountain chain is meant must be left undecided, even if granting that modern cartography could show it if identified. Local tradition, however, would most likely be able to point out a particular mountain.

<p><BO>shes pa </BO> see <BO>mkhyen brtse </BO>.

<p><BO>shos </BO> see <BO>rin che ba </BO>.

<pb id=pb72 n=72 facs="f:080"><p><BO>gshags </BO> see <BO>gshags 'gyed pa </BO><corr>.</corr>

<p><BO>gshags 'gyed pa </BO>, 38. This expression cannot yet be explained with certainty. It may be taken here to mean, literally, &lsquo;to send out (distribute, give, put forward) justice, right,&rsquo; but the exact idiomatic value of the phrase remains to be determined. It is not in the Dicts., and unknown to my informants. We may take the possible values of the expression as three, viz.: 1. <BO>gshags 'gyed pa </BO> = <BO>rtsod pa rgyab pa </BO> = <BO>gshags rgyab pa </BO> = &lsquo;to dispute, argue, contend with words.&rsquo; This seems the same expression as S. Ch. D.&apos;s <BO>kha gshags 'gyed pa </BO> &lsquo;to hold controversy,&rsquo; p. 1248. (Perhaps also &lsquo;to challenge, to be challenged to dispute.&rsquo;) 2. = <BO>lan 'pham pa </BO> &lsquo;to be defeated in argument, in dispute, to be silenced in dispute.&rsquo;

<p>3. = &lsquo;To make observations to, to remonstrate with, to use plain speech to, to speak straight to, to rebuke, to reproach, to tell one the truth.&rsquo; (<hi>Cf<corr>.</corr></hi> the entry in J.&apos;s &ast;k&mlrcomma;a kye-&cgrave;e&ast; to abuse, to menace<corr>&rsquo;</corr> (p. 97<hi>b</hi>.)<corr sic="&rsquo;"></corr>) This seems the sense required here and would be a logical development of the primary meaning of the expression: &lsquo;to spread out the justice (right) of the case before someone,&rsquo; i.e. &lsquo;to submit the truth about it.&rsquo;

<p>S. Ch. D. has s.v. <BO>kha gshags </BO> = <BO>kha rtsod </BO> &lsquo;using rough language, controversy, discussion, dispute.&rsquo; The other Dicts. lack this word.

<p>The above is the result of an exhaustive discussion of the expression with my teachers. Lexicographically (with a view to the entry quoted from S. Ch. D.) the first explanation seems the best, but with reference to the context, the last one deserves preference, and this is the one chosen for the rendering.

<p>It should be noted that in modern Tibetan there seems to be taking place a shifting of the meaning of <BO>gshags </BO>. Instead of as &lsquo;right, justice&rsquo; it seems to be understood by some modern Tibetans as &lsquo;the arguing about right or justice&rsquo; as in a court of law, and hence simply as &lsquo;dispute, argument, pleading.&rsquo; Example: &lsquo;This is not the place to argue your rights,<corr>&rsquo;</corr> <BO>khyod gshags rgyab sa'i </BO> (or <BO>pa'i </BO>) <BO>sa cha 'di ru ma red </BO>, lit. &lsquo;to hit out <pb id=pb73 n=73 facs="f:081">(<BO>rgyab </BO>) for the right,&rsquo; the verb meaning &lsquo;to do (<BO>rgyab </BO> for <foreign lang=la>verba loquendi</foreign>) arguing (<BO>gshags </BO>).&rsquo;

<p><BO>bshad nyan </BO>, 38. Literally &lsquo;speak-listen,&rsquo; has two meanings. The first, quoted in J. from Schmidt in the form of <BO>'chad nyan pa </BO> (s.v. <BO>'chad pa </BO> pf. and fut. <BO>bshad </BO>), is endorsed by my informants, &lsquo;to listen to an explanation (also, to a sermon, discourse, etc.)<corr>&rsquo;.</corr> The second is, &lsquo;to answer upon hearing,&rsquo; i.e. <corr>&lsquo;</corr>to answer (in invective, hotly, in remonstrance or dispute) upon hearing (reproaches or unpleasant words).&rsquo; If a mother chides her son for some fault, he may, instead of taking the rebuke in humility, try to argue or to be impudent in return. The mother then may say: <BO>nga khyod kyi a ma la bshad nyan ma byed 'di las nga'i gtam nyon </BO>, &lsquo;Don&apos;t argue, dispute, bandy words with (don&apos;t be impudent to, &ldquo;no words with me!&rdquo;) your mother, but (<BO>'di las </BO>, &lsquo;rather, on the contrary, instead of this&rsquo;) listen to me.&rsquo; The expression may be rendered as &lsquo;to flare up in answer (to a reproach), to retort angrily (after admonition), to snap, yap back.&rsquo;

<p><BO>bshes gnyen </BO>, 41. &lsquo;Friend&rsquo; and, as J. has it, abbr. for <BO>dge ba'i bshes gnyen </BO> = <SA>kalyaa.namitra</SA> = virtue-friend.

<p>Here interpreted by my informants as &lsquo;true, genuine priests or monks, monks who come up to the mark, worthy of the name,&rsquo; but not technically as &lsquo;spiritual adviser&rsquo; as J. has it. Desg. s.v. <BO>bshes </BO>, quotes only a form with <BO>mnyen </BO> and gives it the meaning &lsquo;doctor, a lamaistic title.&rsquo; Under <BO>gnyen </BO>, however, he has <BO>bshes gnyen </BO>, &lsquo;<foreign lang=la>ad scientiam adjuvans</foreign>, monastic dignity, teacher.&rsquo; S. Ch. D. adds &lsquo;pious or holy friend, spiritual friend or adviser.&rsquo; Compare also J. for the semi-homonym <BO>dge bsnyen </BO>.

<p><BO>sa </BO> see <BO>phyogs </BO>.

<pb id=pb74 n=74 facs="f:082"><p><BO>sems pa </BO> see <BO>bsams shing </BO> and <BO>bka' drin sems pa </BO>.

<p><BO>sems bskyed pa </BO> see <BO>skyed pa </BO>.

<p><BO>gsung </BO>, 54. Here &lsquo;speech&rsquo; in general, not &lsquo;<hi>a</hi> speech,&rsquo; a slight extension of J.&apos;s meanings, unless his use of the definite article in &lsquo;<hi>the</hi> speech&rsquo; is a lapsus. The dicts. differ slightly and need co-ordination in details. About the meaning there can be no doubt as the word is here used in the series (hon.) <BO>sku </BO>, <BO>gsung </BO>, <BO>thugs </BO>, for ordinary <BO>lus </BO>, <BO>ngag </BO>, <BO>yid </BO>, body, speech and mind, the so-called &lsquo;three doors,&rsquo; <BO>sgo gsum </BO>.

<p><BO>gsung mgur </BO> see <BO>mgur ma </BO>.

<p><BO>gsung ba </BO>, 10. Here is the sense of &lsquo;to preach, to explain, to give an exposition of, to expatiate on, to exhibit, to lecture on.&rsquo;

<p><BO>bsam mno </BO> see <BO>rtog dpyod </BO>.

<p><BO>bsam mi khyab </BO>, 12. Inconceivable, unthinkable, unimaginable, not to be grasped by or in thought, beyond comprehension, realisation.

<p><BO>bsams shing bsams shing </BO>, 4. The repetition of the verb softens the meaning into &lsquo;quietly thinking&rsquo; or from <BO>sems pa </BO> &lsquo;to think,&rsquo; into &lsquo;to muse, to ponder&rsquo;, etc.

<p><BO>ang gi dang po </BO> see <BO>dwangs mar </BO>.




<pb id=pb75 n=75 facs="f:083">
<div2 n=F>
<head><ab type=divNum>F.</ab> <hi rend=sc>Additional Notes.</hi></head>


<p>In l. 10 the <BO>la </BO> might also be understood as &lsquo;with a view to, for the purpose of, explaining, expounding.&rsquo; The translation should in that case rather run: With a view to expounding the profound (Buddhist) doctrine, they preached, explained, most fully, minutely, in full detail, Yoga and the other teachings (or the various kinds of Yoga) of the two stages of the road.... <BO>la </BO> has then the force of: with regard, reference to; as far as ... is concerned.

<p>In l. 17 the &lsquo;till&rsquo; ought to be more emphatically rendered: until the very moment that, <hi>i.e.</hi> I shall not cease a moment before. Or else: till I reach the very heart of saintship. See J<corr>.</corr> s.v. <BO>bar </BO><corr>.</corr>

<p>In l. 49 &lsquo;May all those&rsquo; is more correct than &lsquo;May all of you<corr sic="&rsquo;,">,&rsquo;</corr> for, unlike in the three preceding verses which are addressed to his pupils, the author now utters a universal prayer addressed to mankind in general.

<p>Note to p<corr>.</corr> 2. Waddell, L&amacr;maist Graces before Meat, J.R.A.S., 1894, p. 265, says that the libation is sprinkled with the tips of the fore and middle fingers. This is denied by my informants who maintain their statement as given on p. 2, above.

<p>To p. 4. After the Introduction was in print I have seen a copy of the <BO>dga' ldan lha brgya ma </BO>, &lsquo;The Galdan Century of Gods,&rsquo; and had it copied for me. It is a small prayer-book to Tso&ndota; k&mlrcomma;a pa, who manifests in a hundred different forms, and it contains 18 four-lined stanzas of 9 syllables each, with the single exception of the stanza quoted in the Introduction, which contains five lines.

<p>This little book is the one mentioned in the Hor chos byu&ndota; (Huth&apos;s translation, p. 387&mdash;see note 5&mdash;, and text p. 246). Huth gives as Sk. equivalent for the title: Tushitadevaçatik&amacr;. Galdan (Tushita) is here the heaven of that name, not the famous monastery. The stanza we are discussing is also mentioned in the same passage. Its name is <BO>dmigs brtse ma </BO> (The unfathomable love verse). This Dmigs brtse ma is of considerable theological importance. I possess a commentary on it <pb id=pb76 n=76 facs="f:084">written by <BO>blo bzang bskal bzang rgya mtsho </BO>, the seventh Dalai Lama. Grünwedel, in the list of Dalai Lamas on p. 206 of his &lsquo;<foreign lang=de>Mythologie</foreign>,&rsquo; etc., writes <BO>skal ldan </BO> and Rockhill, in &lsquo;Tibet, a ... sketch derived from Chinese sources,&rsquo; J.R.A.S., Vol. XXIII, new series, 1891, p. 287, <BO>skal bzang </BO>.

<p>Since, I have also found that this same stanza, with a modification, occurs on the title page of Sarat Chandra Das&apos; edition of the <BO>dpag bsam 'khri shing </BO> (Bibl. Ind.). The stanza as there given consists of six lines, by the addition of an initial line to

<lg>
    <l><BO>dngos grub kun 'byung thub dbang rdo rje 'chang _/</BO>,
</lg>

<p rend=noindent><hi>i.e.</hi> the Thunderbolt-bearer, Vajradhara.

<p>In another little work, the <BO>spyan 'dren khrus gsol phyag mchod kyi rim pa sgo gsum mun sel </BO>, &lsquo;The illuminator of body, speech and mind concerning the order of inviting, lustrating, making obeisance to and worshipping (Tso&ndota; k&mlrcomma;a pa),&rsquo; the stanza occurs once more, again in a different form.

<p>There, p. 9<hi>b</hi>, the prayer is as in our Introduction, but lacks the third line (<BO>bdud dpung </BO>, etc.) and ends with <BO>dpal la phyag tshal lo </BO>. Also, instead of <BO>'jam pa'i dbyangs </BO> in the second line, this text writes <BO>'jam dpal dbyangs </BO>.

<p>I am informed that the prayer occurs also in many other books with modifications, and that when it is used in connection with <choice><sic><BO>khrus pa </BO></sic><corr resp=errata><BO>khrus </BO></corr></choice> or &lsquo;lustration&rsquo; rites the closing words after <BO>grags pa'i zhabs la </BO> are changed into <BO>sku khrus gsol </BO>, &lsquo;we <corr sic=baptise resp=errata>lustrate</corr> thee.&rsquo;

<p>To p. 17. S. Ch. D., p. 490 <hi>b</hi>, s.v. <BO>gnyan thab pa </BO> mentions a medicinal root used against the plague, called <BO>lcags kya </BO> (without zhabs-kyu), but transcribed lcags kyu.

<p>To p. 23. Huth, Hor chos byu&ndota;, trs., p.117, renders <pb id=pb77 n=77 facs="f:085"><BO>mkha' 'gro </BO> as &ddotb;&amacr;ka, also on p. 118 (see note 4). On p. 231 (see note 1) he suggests that <BO>mkha' 'gro </BO> should be understood as &ddotb;&amacr;kin&imacr; = <BO>mkha' 'gro ma </BO>, not as Sk. &ddotb;&amacr;ka. The <corr sic=dge-rgan>dge rgan</corr> understands all these three passages as referring to (female) &ddotb;&amacr;kin&imacr;s. Though according to Grünwedel (&lsquo;<foreign lang=de>Mythologie</foreign>,&rsquo; p. 153) in Sk. mythology a male &ddotb;&amacr;ka exists (a Tantra deity), in Tibet the <BO>mkha' 'gro </BO> is always feminine, and a male species or individual does not exist according to my informants. This statement needs testing of course. Grünwedel (loc. cit.) thinks that these female &ddotb;&amacr;kin&imacr;s are original Tibetan spirits or goddesses. The female <BO>ye shes mkha' 'gro </BO>&apos;s are mentioned indifferently with or without the final <BO>ma </BO><corr>.</corr> Macdonell in his Sk. Dict. only mentions the feminine form of the word. In the ritual book <BO>gcod cha drug </BO> &ldquo;The six cut off pieces&rdquo; (i.e. chapters, divisions, into which the description of the torma offering is divided) we find the apostrophe: <BO>kye ma mi min ye shes kyi mkha' 'gro ma </BO>, &ldquo;O, wisdom fairy, supernatural (= not-human) mother,&rdquo; so defining the sex. In Tibetan the form <BO>mkha' 'gro </BO> must accordingly not be understood as a masculine form of <BO>mkha' 'gro ma </BO>, but as its abbreviated form only. This without prejudice to the question whether in special <corr sic=Tantrik>Tantric</corr> texts a male god &Ddotb;&amacr;ka, <BO>mkha' 'gro </BO>, does occur.

<p>S. Ch. D. has for <BO>mkha' 'gro </BO> an entry giving the meanings &lsquo;god, bird, arrow.&rsquo; Here the word has a poetical or metaphorical meaning based on its etymology, &lsquo;sky-goer&rsquo;, but no mythological value. He adds under <BO>mkha' 'gro ma </BO> &lsquo;a class, <hi>mainly</hi> of female spirits.&rsquo; But the form in <BO>ma </BO> cannot be masculine. In Tibet there is a class of people called <BO>chos rje </BO>, both male and female, whose name may be translated as oracles, <pb id=pb78 n=78 facs="f:086">shamans or mediums. They are deemed to be obsessed by <BO>chos skyong </BO>&apos;s who speak through them whilst they themselves are in a state of trance or obsession. Their name is <BO>chos rje </BO> in <corr sic=Lhassa>Lhasa</corr> and other greater towns, and amongst the more educated; but the country-people and the lower orders have a special name for these mediums if they are women and call them <BO>rnal 'byor ma </BO> or <BO>mkha' 'gro ma </BO>. In Sikkhim the word <BO>mkha' 'gro ma </BO> is general in this sense. In Sikkhim the designation for a male medium of this sort is <BO>dpa' bo </BO> and not <BO>chos rje </BO> as in Tibet.

<p>Whilst investigating the question of Khandomas from the standpoint of colloquial Tibetan I stumbled unexpectedly on the following interesting piece of information, throwing a vivid sidelight on some current beliefs and practices of modern Tibet.

<p>The abbot of the Saskya monastery is held to be the reincarnation of Padmasambhava. As the latter was the great &lsquo;binder,&rsquo; that is subduer, of all spirits, witches, goblins and other creatures of that ilk, the Saskya abbot has in some way become the official head and master of all Tibetan witches. Belief in witches is rife all over Tibet, and any woman is liable to be declared one. The process is very simple. If a great Lama receives obeisance from the multitude he presents the devotees in return with a &lsquo;protection-knot&rsquo; (<BO>srung mdud </BO>), a narrow strip of cloth which he puts round their necks. He ties a knot in it muttering some mantram over it, hence the name. Ordinary laymen receive a white strip, tapas or those who have their hair cut short (probably because they look like tapas) get a yellow or red strip, but if a woman approaches whom the Lama by his magic knowledge recognizes as a witch, she receives a black strip. From that moment she is irrevocably a witch and no protestation can help her out of the situation. In the Saskya monastery an annual feast or ceremony is celebrated in which all witches must appear personally, and the magic then displayed is so tremendously powerful that all women who are secretly endowed with the powers of witchcraft without the people knowing it, are irresistibly compelled to attend the meeting. They simply cannot help it, and so stories are told of witches working in the fields, milking cows, or otherwise engaged, being drawn away from their work and appearing in the assembly with their milk-pail, or spindle, or <pb id=pb79 n=79 facs="f:087">whatever utensil they were using at the time at any work, when they were forced to quit it and to come to Saskya. In the meeting they are then officially proclaimed witches and forced to pledge allegiance and obedience to the Saskya monastery and its head. Then the profitable and practical side of the transaction becomes manifest, for henceforth they have to pay an annual, heavy witch-tax, and in cases known to Karma himself, who came across them when living in Tibet, this tax amounted to one <BO>rdo tshad </BO> (see Bell, p. 104) or about Rs. 120 a year. On the other hand they are now protected by the authority of the monastery as long as they pay the tax, though they have to pledge themselves not to use their powers for evil. Then they receive the official title of <BO>sa skya mkha' 'gro </BO>, though they are known to the people as <BO>'ba' mo </BO>, witch. But this latter word is a term of abuse or contempt. The meaning of the two terms, however, is the same. The entries in the dicts. s.v. <BO>'ba' mo </BO> and <BO>po </BO> (and other spellings) need proper testing in the light of the above. These witches are supposed not to live up to a great age but to die young, because the monastery calls them out of life to become protecting spirits of the monastery in the invisible spheres. When a bamo dies, her daughter, if she has any, inherits the office or quality of the mother. These bamos, during life, follow the ordinary occupations of women: buying, selling, working or marrying, and their bamo-hood seems to be no drawback, in itself, to their matrimonial prospects. I heard of the case of a bamo who was the wife of a very wealthy man. But the tax, far in excess of any levied on ordinary people, must be regularly paid. If the bamo does not pay her tax, the monastery calls her soul and she dies. In the gompa for every accredited <BO>'ba' mo </BO> there is a <BO>sob </BO> or stuffed effigy, puppet, of which I have not been able to get a full description. Probably a stuffed doll or body, with a mask and garment, perhaps only a stick to hold the mask and garment up, like in a puppet-show. Each such puppet becomes the dwelling-place of the soul of a dead bamo when she dies, and in order to see to it that after death she may not do harm whilst roaming about, the puppet is bound in chains. Horrible to say, however, sometimes these chains are found broken by the guardians, and this is a sure sign that the imprisoned soul has escaped from the puppet <pb id=pb80 n=80 facs="f:088">which was its <corr sic="dwelling place-and">dwelling-place and</corr> that it may have started on a pilgrimage of evil works. As soon as it is found that such an imprisoned witch-soul has escaped, solemn notice is at once sent out to all Tibet to the effect that a bamo-soul has broken loose from Saskya, and the various local Lamas all through the country warn their flocks that a bamo is at large and enjoin them to be careful not to fall a victim to the wandering witch. So, for instance, they are told not to go about alone after dark, not to entertain strangers, and the like, for the bamo may assume any disguise, and any man may fall a prey to the snares of a beautiful strange woman, as any woman might be allured by an unknown man. The late Lama Sherabgyamtsho in Ghoom, whose name is so well known to all students of Tibetan, used very often to make solemn announcements of this nature and warn the Ghoom people that a bamo had escaped from Saskya<corr>.</corr>

<p>A most fitting ending to this story is perhaps to be made by quoting the old Buddhist formula &ldquo;Thus I have heard,&rdquo; but there is no doubt that the word <BO>mkha' 'gro ma </BO> acquires an interesting new meaning through this curious tale.

<p>There is a belief prevalent in Tibet that in every woman a touch of bamo-hood is latent (some philosophers, also outside Tibet, seem to think the same!), but in the night of the 29th day of the twelfth Tibetan month, this seed of evil will manifest most fully. The male Tibetans, however, seem not to take any precautions or perform any rites to counteract the sinister influence of this date. Evidently it is a male Tibetan who first set up this theory, and it might be the same fellow who is the author of the following proverb which bears on our subject and on the words we are dealing with. It runs:


<lg>
    <l><BO>skyes dman brgya la mkha' 'gro gcig </BO>
    <l><BO>khyo ga brgya la </BO><choice><sic><BO>'ba' bo </BO></sic><corr><BO>'ba' po </BO></corr></choice><BO>gcig </BO>
</lg>

<milestone unit=tb rend=space>

<lg>
    <l>Amongst a hundred women (at most) one khando!
    <l>Amongst a hundred men (at most) one sorcerer!
</lg>


<p>That is&mdash;khando being here used in the good sense of fairy&mdash;: Amongst many women there is scarcely one extremely good, but amongst many men there is scarcely one extremely bad. In fact, in Tibet, all women are suspected of having just a little seed of evil (of the witch) in them. And so the term of reproach is not as in Europe &lsquo;Old Adam&rsquo; but rather &lsquo;Old Eve.&rsquo;

<p>As far as the above story is concerned, it should not be forgotten that it is only a popular version of an interesting phase of religious practice, but Tibetan casuistry and theology are as a rule so subtle and well-systematised that a more <pb id=pb81 n=81 facs="f:089">theoretical exposition of the doctrines and practices alluded to might throw considerably more, if not other and new, light on the subject.

<p>To p. 25. The quotation, s.v. <BO>khrel ba</BO><corr><BO>*</BO></corr>, l. 16: <BO>chos thos pas </BO>, etc., is from a little tract, a prayer to Padmasambhava, entitled <BO>bsam pa myur 'grub ma </BO>, &lsquo;the quick mind-fulfiller.&rsquo;

<p>To p. 25. <hi>Cf.</hi> Lewin, pp. 133&ndash;134, no. 97&ndash;10, <BO>gzhad gad </BO> (<BO>rgyu </BO>), ridiculous; <hi>zhed-ked</hi>, laughter, ridicule.

<p>To p. 26. <BO>ngo tsha ba </BO> Bell, voc., to blush; Lewin, p. 77 (64&ndash;5), ridiculous. See his example.

<p>To p. 30. S. Ch. D., Dict., has <BO>ko ko </BO> (hidden on p. 34, out of alphabetical order) as &lsquo;a Tibetan of mixed breed, <hi>i.e.</hi> born of a Chinese father and a Tibetan mother.&rsquo; Waddell, Lhasa and its Mysteries, p. 214, the same explanation. A special enquiry into this point, however, yielded a different result. One of my informants was a Tibetan woman from Lhasa who had herself married a Chinaman there, and so ought to know. The half-breeds referred to by S. Ch. D. and Waddell are called &lsquo;baizhin,&rsquo; spelling uncertain, given as <BO>bal bzhin </BO> and <BO>ba'i zhin </BO>, said to be a Chinese word. However, another explanation of that same word was given, as a man not in the pay of, not taking wages from, another. Not necessarily rich or of high position, but independent. Perhaps something like crofter. This latter explanation is, however, contradicted by Karma who has relations amongst the baizhins in Tibet.

<p>In a Tibetan mixed marriage such as we are here considering the custom is to call the elder son <BO>ko ko </BO> after the Chinese manner, instead of using the Tibetan word. This is <BO>a jo </BO> in Tsang and <BO>jo jo </BO> in Lhasa. The latter is pronounced, and sometimes written, <BO>co co </BO> and even sometimes pronounced chö-cho, as if written <BO>cos co </BO>. But in the above case <BO>ko ko </BO> means really &lsquo;elder brother.&rsquo; A girl, born in such a marriage, is similarly called <BO>mi mi </BO>, Chinese, instead of <BO>a che </BO>, Tibetan<corr>.</corr> <pb id=pb82 n=82 facs="f:090">These terms do not mean half-blood. Whether <BO>mi mi </BO> is used for the eldest daughter alone or for all the daughters of the marriage I could not ascertain.

<p>It is said that every Chinaman, however humble, becomes at once a personage of importance when in Tibet, and demands to be addressed at least as <BO>dpon po </BO>, Mister, Sir (as every European becomes automatically a Sahib in India), and feels quite insulted if addressed by the more familiar <BO>ko ko </BO> as a liberty taken with his dignity. A Chinaman from Tibet, however, denied this. I remember once travelling in the Sunda country with my Javanese writer who met several people on the road whom he knew and whom he saluted as &lsquo;little brother&rsquo; or &lsquo;elder brother.&rsquo; I was puzzled at his belonging to so big a family, but found the solution of the riddle when I understood that this fraternity was not one of consanguinity at all. So &lsquo;elder sister&rsquo; amongst Tibetans means only Madam, Lady, or a polite word of address to any woman of more than low status in life. In German <foreign lang=de>Mütterchen</foreign> for any old woman of simple status.

<p>To pp. 35&ndash;37. The expression <BO>kun tu bzang pos brgyan pa'i zhing </BO> occurring in the little prayer-book <BO>bzang spyod </BO> can hardly mean &lsquo;a field (= heaven, world) which Kuntuzangpo has adorned&rsquo; (beautified, decorated, embellished), in the sense in which one may decorate a house or room, with beautiful pictures, furniture, etc. It must surely be understood as &lsquo;the heaven blazing with the glory of Kuntuzangpo&apos;s presence in it,&rsquo; a heaven resplendent with his glory. In other words, he adorns it by his mere being there, but not as the result of some activity expressed by a transitive verb. The world <hi>is</hi> adorned, but <hi>has not been</hi> decorated or beautified. I wonder if the agentive case <BO>pos </BO> may be understood as in English expressions like: &lsquo;happy <hi>through</hi> him,&rsquo; &lsquo;blazing <hi>with</hi> diamonds,&rsquo; &lsquo;laughing <hi>for</hi> joy,&rsquo; and the like.

<p>To p. 40. See the unusual explanation of <BO>ces pa </BO> in S. Ch. D., s.v. <BO>ga </BO> III, where he translates <BO>ces pa'o </BO> as &lsquo;it may be said.&rsquo; The dge rgan, however, paraphrases the expression here as <BO>lab pa red </BO> or <BO>lab gi 'dug </BO>, or <BO>ces smras so </BO>, which gives <pb id=pb83 n=83 facs="f:091">it another meaning, namely: &lsquo;so it has been said,&rsquo; &lsquo;so is the teaching,&rsquo; &lsquo;that is what has been taught.&rsquo; In this sense the previous words are a direct quotation and the <BO>ces pa'o </BO> cannot be translated as &lsquo;it may be said that.&rsquo;

<p>To p. 40. In the note to <BO>chags sdang </BO>, for <BO>'dod chags dang zhe sdang </BO>, <hi>non</hi>-attachment and <hi>in</hi>difference only in connection with a negative.

<p>To p. 44. <BO>lta ba </BO>. See Graham Sandberg, Tibet and the Tibetans, p. 268, who renders this word, as a technical term denoting the first of the four stages of meditation, according to Milaraspa, as &lsquo;contemplation&rsquo; or &lsquo;concentration.&rsquo; The second word, denoting a mental action unconnected with visual experience, does not seem appropriate. As in English &lsquo;view&rsquo; has both a physical and a mental meaning, so in Tibetan <BO>lta ba </BO>, as a verb, has mental connotations. J. has the word as sbst. &lsquo;mystical contemplation.&rsquo; The Sk. equivalent, <SA>dar"sana</SA>, is likewise both physical and mental in meaning. Whereas J. and S. Ch. D. have a sbst. <BO>lta ba </BO> &lsquo;the act of looking,&rsquo; and &lsquo;a look,&rsquo; Desg. has it as &lsquo;sight&rsquo; (<foreign lang=fr>visus, vue</foreign>, &ldquo;etc.&rdquo;).

<p>To p. 58. See Jäschke&apos;s note on ma&ndotb;&ddotb;a and ma&ndotb;&ddotb;ala, s.v. <BO>dkyil </BO>, p. 11 <hi>b</hi>. His remark may have a bearing on the question of &ddotb;&amacr;ka and &ddotb;&amacr;kin&imacr;, discussed above. See next note.

<p>To pp. 59 and 60. My informants, though ignorant about the detail of five and nine cushions, do know of a custom requiring the man of higher social position, greater age, more prestige, to be seated on a <hi>higher</hi> seat as a sign of respect. The difference of height, however, is in the seat itself, not effected by the placing of a number of cushions on seats of equal height.

<p>To <BO>gdan </BO> still the two following words: <BO>rta gdan </BO>, saddle cloth, and <BO>kha gdan </BO>, second sheet, upper sheet, covering sheet over the <BO>'bol gdan </BO>. The <BO>'bol gdan </BO> is usually thick and rough but the <BO>kha gdan </BO> thin and of finer texture, like in European <pb id=pb84 n=84 facs="f:092">beds the bed sheet over the mattress. The <BO>'bol gdan </BO> is for softness and the <BO>kha gdan </BO> for cleanliness, like the loose covers of armchairs and sofas in Western countries.

<p>To p. 62. Huth, Hor chos byu&ndota;, trs. 117, note 4, reconstitutes the name Blo bza&ndota; grags pai dpal into Sk. Matibhadrak&imacr;rtiçr&imacr;. In Tibetan mantrams, however, where Tso&ndota; k&mlrcomma;a pa&apos;s name is given in its Sk. form, Sumati is used and not Matibhadra. See also p. 5 of the Introduction, <hi>supra</hi>.

<p>To p. 64. The word <BO>dmigs med </BO> (p. 3 and additional note to p. 4) should have been discussed there. Desg. alone has the meaning of the word as in our text: unthinkable, unimaginable. According to oral information, synonymous with <BO>bsam mi khyab </BO>, l. 12, see p. 74, <hi>supra</hi>.

<p>The elaborate entries in J. and S. Ch. D. under this word and under <BO>dmigs pa med pa </BO> need investigation.

<p>The word <BO>dmigs pa </BO> has also a special meaning, not in the dictionaries, in connection with any action done &lsquo;in thought,&rsquo; <BO>dmigs pa byed pa </BO> (as in English &lsquo;I am with you in thought&rsquo;). But Tibetans can not only be present in thought but they can give presents &lsquo;in thought,&rsquo; and do all sorts of things &lsquo;in thought,&rsquo; when there is no physical possibility of doing so in the flesh. So the good story is told of a lazy Lama who, to get rid of the crowd, said: &ldquo;And now I give my hand-blessing to you all &lsquo;in thought,&rsquo;&rdquo; whereupon a disappointed and angry pilgrim answered: &ldquo;Well, then I give you my butter-offerings, which I have brought with me, also &lsquo;in thought.&rsquo;&rdquo;

<p>To p. 65. The dictionaries spelt <BO>po ta la </BO> but the <corr sic=dge-rgan>dge rgan</corr> says that <BO>po tA la </BO> also occurs. Desg. has an alternative spelling <BO>po Da la </BO>, but this seems a misprint for <BO>po Ta la </BO><corr>.</corr> In Tibetan books I have only seen <BO>ta </BO> but the dge rgan is sure that the two spellings, <BO>Ta </BO> and <BO>tA </BO> (but not <BO>TA </BO>), occur as well.

<pb id=pb85 n=85 facs="f:093"><p>To the text. When the larger part of this booklet was in print I acquired an additional copy of the text, which proved to be different from the two editions used by me. It is of the same size and style as edition A, but printed from other blocks. We call it C. The copy is a poor one, badly printed from worn-out blocks. A collation brought no news of importance. The reading <BO>nges so </BO> in l. 16, however, is confirmed by this edition. Its only new reading is <BO>'ching bar </BO> for <BO>'chang bar </BO> in l. 46. This reading does not seem so satisfactory as the one we have followed. The full result of the collation is given below. Indistinct readings are marked with a note of interrogation.


<table id=tbl.85>
<row><cell>C.  <cell>l. 13.               <cell><BO>'dzin ba'i </BO>?      <cell>for <cell><BO>pa'i </BO>
<row><cell>    <cell>l. 18.               <cell><BO>gtogs bar </BO>        <cell> &rdquo;  <cell><BO>par </BO>
<row><cell>    <cell>l. 24.               <cell><BO>brtson pa </BO>        <cell> &rdquo;  <cell><BO>par </BO>
<row><cell>    <cell>l. 29.               <cell><BO>kun slang </BO>        <cell> &rdquo;  <cell><BO>slong </BO>
<row><cell>    <cell>l. 30.               <cell><BO>mchan </BO>?           <cell> &rdquo;  <cell><BO>mtshan </BO>
<row><cell>    <cell>l. 41.               <cell><BO>bshes gnyen nga </BO>? <cell> &rdquo;  <cell><BO>pa </BO>
<row><cell>    <cell>l. 44.               <cell><BO>'dug ba'i </BO>        <cell> &rdquo;  <cell><BO>pa'i </BO>
<row><cell>    <cell>l. 46.               <cell><BO>'ching </BO>           <cell> &rdquo;  <cell><BO>'chang </BO>
<row><cell>    <cell>l. 50.               <cell><BO>rnges </BO>            <cell> &rdquo;  <cell><BO>rjes </BO>
<row><cell>    <cell>l. 51<corr>.</corr>  <cell><BO>rtogs nga'i </BO>      <cell> &rdquo;  <cell><BO>pa'i </BO>
<row><cell>    <cell>Colophon.            <cell><BO>gdungs </BO>           <cell> &rdquo;  <cell><BO>gdung </BO>
<row><cell>    <cell>   &rdquo;                 <cell><BO>bkra shis </BO>        <cell> &rdquo;  <cell>desunt.
</table>


<p>The variants of ll. 30, 41, 50 and 51 are evidently due to deterioration of the blocks. There is no <BO>!</BO> in this edition.




<pb id=pb86 n=86 facs="f:094">
</body>
<back id=backmatter>
<div1 id=errata type=Errata>
<head>ERRATA.</head>


<p><table id=tbl.errata>
<row><cell>p. 7:  <cell>first variant, bottom, <hi>read</hi>: <BO>snyeg </BO>.
<row><cell>p. 8:  <cell>l. 20 of text, insert asterisk after <BO>brtse </BO>.
<row><cell>p. 9:  <cell>second variant, bottom, <hi>read</hi>: <BO>'khrel </BO>.
<row><cell>p. 14, <cell>l. 13: teacher (or: teachers).
<row><cell>p. 14, <cell>l. 14: his (or: their).
<row><cell>p. 25, <cell>l. 1: <hi>for</hi> render <hi>read</hi>: repay.
<row><cell>p. 27, <cell>l. 20: <hi>for</hi> render <hi>read</hi>: repay.
<row><cell>p. 27, <cell>l. 27, 28: eliminate the commas outside the brackets.
<row><cell>p. 36, <cell>l. 4: <hi>for</hi> Smuck <hi>read</hi>: Schmuck.
<row><cell>p. 65, <cell>l. 24: <hi>for</hi> Lhassa <hi>read</hi>: Lhasa.
<row><cell>p. 76, <cell>l. 24: <hi>for</hi> <BO>khrus pa </BO> <hi>read</hi>: <BO>khrus </BO>.
<row><cell>p. 76. <cell>l. 25: <hi>for</hi> baptise <hi>read</hi>: lustrate.
</table>



</div1>


<divGen type=toc id=toc>


<divGen type=Colophon>


</back>
</text>
</TEI.2>

<!--

CHECKLIST (X = done; / = not applicable)

Initial cleanup

[ ] Check all pb-tags, and join lines
[ ] Move all footnotes in-line
[ ] Tag headers
[X] Fix all [** Proofer comments]
[ ] Start all paragraphs with the p-tag
[ ] Change b, sc, g tags to hi tags with correct attributes.
[ ] Change tb tags to milestone tags.
[ ] Fix multiple spaces in a row
[ ] Verify all paragraphs start with p-tag, also those starting with a tag.

TEI header

[ ] Add TEI header.
[ ] Fill in details in TEI header
[ ] Verify Author dates and add to TEI header.
[ ] Document on-line scan sources.
[ ] Fill in description in noteStmt.
[ ] Fill in keywords / Subjects
[ ] Add auto-generated colophon divGen tag.
[ ] Fill in reference to LOC record (https://catalog.loc.gov/).
[ ] Fill in reference to OpenLibrary record (https://openlibrary.org).
[ ] Fill in reference to WorldCat record (source and work) (https://www.worldcat.org).
[ ] Generate unique epub-id. (https://www.guidgenerator.com/)

Verse

[ ] Tag all verse.
[ ] Apply proper indentation: rend=&ldquo;indent(2)&rdquo;

Lists

[ ] Tag all lists.

Tables

[ ] Format tables
[ ] Apply ditto-tags.

Table of Contents

[ ] Format table(s) of contents
[ ] Link entries in table of contents
[ ] Verify each link
[ ] Compare with generated table of contents

Images

[ ] Include all illustrations
[ ] Verify positioning of images makes sense.

Spelling

[ ] Verify generated wordlist
[ ] Tag language usage

Tools

[ ] Verify Gutcheck
[ ] Verify jeebees

Miscellany

[ ] Check for [Greek: ...] notation
[ ] Curlify quotes
[ ] Check for wrong quotes
[ ] Disambiguate single quotes, apostrophes, and primes.
[ ] Unwrap lines
[ ] Check for lines not unwrapped
[ ] Verify sequence of page-numbers
[ ] Handle fractions, such as 1/2.
[ ] Converted all fragments in uppercase to mixed case.

Text Version

[ ] Remove FIGURE notations
[ ] Verify empty lines between chapter headings
[ ] Verify empty lines around poetry and lists
[ ] Center poetry
[ ] Format title page
[ ] Remove Ads
[ ] Format Tables
[ ] Verify Greek and other transliterations

Additional Checks and Edits (Add as needed for a specific book)

[ ] ....

Posting

[ ] Make sure dp-post@pgdp.net is cc-ed on upload

Post-Posting

[ ] Update status to 1.0 (i.e. Posted).
[ ] Include PG number and posting date in metadata

-->
